---
title: Good mothers are friendly and make good friends.
---

# Good mothers are friendly and make good friends.
{:.page-break-after}

I fell into a pattern. Most days, I would set off to the park mid-afternoon. Often, if we hadn’t said anything the day before, I would text Rose and see if she was going. Sometimes I’d go even if she wasn’t. But if I knew she’d be there, I always went. I think that Rose enjoyed seeing me as much as I enjoyed seeing her, and she quickly felt like one of my best friends, even though I actually knew very little about her.

My real, since always, best friend, Lerato, was very suspicious of Rose.

Lerato and I met at school – one of the few co-ed, progressive private schools in Joburg in those days, which tended to attract the children of the odd and alternative. In my case, I’d first gone to the local government school, but had found myself deeply unhappy when I started at the high school. My primary-school friends had emigrated, or moved, or found new, cooler friends. Instead of being one of the acceptable if not wildly popular kids as I’d been at primary school, I suddenly became decidedly unpopular, and more and more unhappy, although I tried desperately to hide it from my parents. My marks dropped, I became unsociable and I stayed in my room most of the time when I was at home. I thought about vomiting, something I knew teenagers were supposed to do to feel better, but I wasn’t brave enough to try. And anyway, I wasn’t actually worried about my weight – in my misery, if anything, I was too thin. Every morning I had to push a great heavy rock of worry off my chest just to get out of bed.

Eventually, after a week where everyone – *everyone* – in my class had called me ‘Stink Bomb Becky’ and made fart noises whenever I was around, I finally broke down and told my mom how miserable I was. She held me while I cried, and then said she would sort it out. I protested, knowing my life would become truly unbearable if my mom said anything to anyone at school. But she shushed me and told me to trust her to do the right thing.

I trusted her to do what *she* thought was the right thing, but I didn’t think she really understood what it was like to be bullied and unpopular and helpless.

I heard my parents talking that night, into the dark hours, their voices rising and falling while my brother, Carl, slept soundly in the room next to mine. I guessed they were discussing what to tell the teachers, and how to help me stand up to my tormenters. At the thought of getting up and going to school, I thought I would stop breathing.

The next morning my mom surprised me. She said that I didn’t have to put on my school uniform or go to school. She took the day off work, and spent it on the phone to schools that my dad and her thought might be better for me. I could see the needles of worry knitting her brow as she wrote down their fees, but for myself, I felt like someone had turned the oxygen back on.

In the afternoon, she took me off to see a school where they had an immediate space because someone was emigrating. I swear, as soon as I stepped through the gate, I knew I would be happy there. I can’t explain what it was, but there was an aura around the teachers and pupils that said, ‘We’ll accept you as you are.’ And even though the fees were about ten times my previous school, and my mom and dad didn’t really have the money, I was enrolled. When I tentatively asked how they would afford it, my mom told me that was their business, not mine, and that it would be fine.

Before that day, I had loved my parents. But with this decision, which literally saved me, my love became unbreakable. I discarded the hedgehog prickles of adolescence, and devoted myself to showing them that they’d made the right decision.

It was pre-1994, and Lerato was one of two black children in my class. It wasn’t that the school was exclusionary, but it was situated in the deep northern suburbs (‘This was all farmland when I was a boy,’ my father said every single morning as we drove to school. Every. Single. Morning) and although change was in the air, racially mixed schooling was still the exception rather than the rule. So in my class there was Millicent-Ann, leading to the nickname Milan, who’d been adopted by a white family in the days when this was positively outrageous and possibly illegal, and Lerato. Lerato was the only child of a couple who would later be called struggle heroes. Her parents were still in exile then, but they’d sent her home to live with her aunt, so that she could be schooled in South Africa. Lerato was a little bit foreign and a little bit exotic and totally bewitching to the fourteen-year-old me. From the first day, when I was seated next to her, I adored her. And, to my utmost surprise, the feeling was mutual.

From the beginning, we were different. Lerato was academically strong and excelled in subjects like maths and history – both of which tripped me up. Although my marks began to improve at the new school, I was never going to be a doctor or a lawyer. The thing I discovered, that had somehow gone unnoticed before, was art. I’d always liked drawing and messing around with paint, glue and scissors and sparkly things. My previous teachers hadn’t seen anything special in it, and my parents had expressed the ordinary pride they expressed in almost anything I did. But the art teacher at my new school got all excited about me and suddenly, instead of being ‘Stink Bomb Becky’, I was ‘talented Rebecca’. For matric I did subjects like art and photography (because that was the kind of school it was), and when Lerato went to Wits to study Law, I was right there too, doing Fine Arts.

Lerato was disparaging about my ‘arty’ friends, and because I got involved in political and environmental causes, she’d refer to my ‘hefty-lefties’ and ‘tree-huggers’. ‘If we hadn’t met so young,’ she used to say, ‘I would worry that I was just your token black friend.’ And that was Lerato: bitingly honest, often too close to the bone; always my friend.

When I had a child, she referred to my ‘mummified friends’ in much the same way. After she met Rose at my house one afternoon, she took double umbrage and called her ‘that arty-mummy woman’.

‘You can’t trust those types,’ she told me, smoothing the pencil-sharp creases in her pants, and tapping her manicured nails ominously on her knee. ‘Watch. This. Space.’

I ignored her, mostly because if I only chose friends approved by Lerato Mofokeng, I wouldn’t have any.

***

Rose and I noticed Lilith at the park about a week before we spoke to her. She was sitting next to one of the other park regulars, a woman called Sophie, who only allowed her twin boys to eat organic food, and thought that Rose and I were the Antichrist of motherhood for the abandon with which we flung Flings at ours. When we’d first spoken to Sophie, Rose had nodded sympathetically as Sophie bemoaned the challenges of finding properly certified organic vegetables.

‘It’s so hard, isn’t it?’ Rose had said while calmly opening a packet of lurid orange Niknaks for Maggie. Then she told Sophie a funny story about trying to buy organic carrots, where the shop assistant had sent her to the pet shop because she’d thought she was asking for parrots. I laughed at the story, even though Rose was actually repeating something that had been told to both of us by another mom the week before. That, after all, was Rose’s gift – finding the right thing to say to everyone.

When we saw Lilith together that first time, she was sitting next to Sophie, hugging her knees to her body, her head cocked to listen to something Sophie was saying, her eyes fixed on her little girl, who was playing nearby. Lilith was blonde, her hair cut short, and tucked behind her ears. Her features were fine, and when she smiled a fan of lines spread across the side of her nose. There was something translucent about her skin, making her seem other-worldly, and she had just a light scattering of freckles. She was slight, but in a way that suggested strength – I could imagine her running, or horse riding. Something outdoorsy.

‘She seems very friendly,’ said Rose, with a nod towards Lilith. ‘She’s always talking to different people.’

‘She looks nice,’ I said. I wasn’t really sure I believed this though. Possibly I should have said that she looked interesting. But Rose always thought that people looked ‘nice’, and we were still in that phase of friendship where you want to agree.

We watched her for a while. I don’t know what Rose saw, but I was fascinated by the way the woman’s eyes almost never left her child, although you could tell that she was also listening properly to Sophie.

We watched Lilith and Sophie a few more times after that; they seemed like Rose and me – best park friends. And then, maybe a week later, Lilith arrived at the park, and instead of walking over to Sophie, she ambled over to Rose and me, holding her daughter’s hand.

‘Hi,’ she said when she reached us, shielding her eyes with her hand. ‘I’m Lilith Browne. With an “e”.’ She stopped and laughed. ‘I always say that – it’s like a nervous tic. Obviously you don’t need to know how to spell my surname.’ She laughed again, and I recognised that she was a bit anxious about introducing herself to strangers, but still determined enough to do it. ‘Mind if I join you?’

‘Sure,’ said Rose before I had a chance to speak. ‘I’m Rose MacFarlane, and this is Rebecca Prince.’ She pointed to Amy and Maggie, who were uncharacteristically playing together. ‘Those are our girls.’

Lilith pushed her daughter slightly forward – a slight blonde girl with big eyes, dressed in layers of leggings, net skirts, clashing colours and sparkles. You could tell that this was a little girl who knew her own style. You could almost hear the echo of the morning entreaties to wear something normal.

‘This is my daughter, Ruby-Mae,’ said Lilith.

‘Ruby Ruby,’ said her daughter emphatically.

Lilith sighed, but her eyes were smiling. ‘Fine,’ she said. ‘This is my daughter Ruby Ruby.’

Rose and I laughed. ‘Hi, Ruby Ruby,’ we both said.

Lilith sat down next to us, and Ruby ran over to the jungle gym. Lilith looked at us, and I noticed what an unusual colour her eyes were, a blue-green grey, and one eye had a freckle in it.

‘Rebecca and Rose,’ said Lilith, ‘please tell me you’re not neurotic about organic food?’

Rose burst out laughing in that generous way of hers. ‘Has Sophie been at you?’

Lilith’s laugh was a throaty gurgle. ‘She’s very nice. But she’s absolutely obsessed.’

We all looked over at Sophie, who was carefully not making eye contact, and I felt a bit sad for her.

‘Should we call her over?’ I said.

‘I know I’m being like a horrible teenager,’ said Lilith, ‘but please, just one day off.’

We all laughed again, and when Sophie looked over, Lilith waved and mouthed ‘Hello,’ and Sophie looked slightly mollified.

‘Now,’ said Lilith. ‘Tell me about yourselves.’

Afterwards, Rose said that being with Lilith was like being interviewed by a journalist. I thought that I had probably been interviewed by more journalists than Rose, and I disagreed; it seemed like the first session with a psychologist. She asked us question after question, not allowing us time between to ask her anything about herself. And most of the time, while we were answering, she nodded and made appropriate responses, but kept her eyes on Ruby.

Ruby-Mae’s hair was the same colour as Lilith’s, a fine blonde, and I watched Amy carefully, worried she might pull it. Amy had a thing about blonde hair. It seemed to call to her, and once her fingers had made contact, it was like she wanted to take it all for herself. Obviously, the people whose heads the blonde hair was attached to were seldom sympathetic, and Amy had a bit of a reputation at the park as a hair puller. It broke my heart, because I knew she meant no harm.

I saw that Amy had noticed Ruby-Mae’s hair because her little head cocked to the side, her lively brown eyes watching her, and I stood up, ready to stop the pulling. But Amy reached for Ruby’s hair and stroked it, something I’d never seen her do before. Then she wrapped her arms around Ruby and yelled loud enough for us to hear, ‘Love!’

Lilith laughed, and so did I, although more with relief than anything else. I explained about Amy and the hair, worrying that maybe Lilith would stop Ruby-Mae from playing with such a rough little girl.

Lilith’s reaction was the first thing about her that surprised me.

‘I guess Amy likes Ruby-Mae,’ said Lilith, and I heard happiness in her voice.

‘I think she must,’ I agreed, watching the girls race up the steps to the slide together.

Then Rose clapped her hands and called out to the girls that it was time to start packing up.

***

The next day Lilith was there again, and she waved at me, but stayed talking to a mother I’d never seen before. Ruby and Amy found each other and played together, but Lilith didn’t join me. I felt a bit rejected as I left, and I couldn’t help wondering what it was that I’d said, or if it was indeed Amy’s hair-pulling. Or if maybe it was Rose she’d wanted to make friends with.

But after that one time, she joined me every time we saw each other at the park, whether I was alone or with Rose. She always seemed delighted to see us, and would often leave off chatting to another person when we arrived. While conversation was always a little unbalanced – with Lilith asking questions, me answering, and Rose telling light-hearted stories – we grew to really like her.

And, slowly, Rose and I opened our little circle to include Lilith.

