---
title: Good mothers open their homes.
---

# Good mothers open their homes.
{:.page-break-after}

It wasn’t long before Rose and I started having playdates at each other’s houses. Rose, being Rose, invited me first, and Maggie clapped her little hands with happiness the first time we made plans to visit. It turned out that Rose lived very nearby, and visiting her was actually a lot more convenient than going to the park.

It had been a long time since I’d made new friends – not really since university. My work as an artist is mostly solitary, and although I’d met some nice people through galleries, I hadn’t made what my mom would call ‘house friends’. So I felt a bit anxious about visiting Rose – it felt a bit like a test.

Her house, just up the road from us, was very like Rose herself: colourful, generous and a bit over the top. When I was in her home, I suddenly felt like my own carefully chosen furniture and décor was exactly that – careful. It’s strange; I’m an artist, so you’d think I’d feel confident about colour, but in Rose’s home it felt like she was the artist. She also had the most lovely art collection – and to my enormous gratification, she had a small one of my Dogs.

My Dogs are the reason that I’m well known, and the reason I make a fairly good living for an artist. For years I painted either landscapes or what I call ‘roomscapes’. I tried to make them a bit quirky and fun, and in my studio I had a giant mood board with images I admired or that had caught my eye. My landscapes typically had animals, or the odd figure, and my rooms most often featured cats and tea – the idea being to create a picture of a space that the viewer wants to be sitting in. I sold just enough to scrape by, and supplemented my painting with some illustration work.

One day, feeling uninspired, I doodled a picture of a few dogs. Choosing almost at random, I redrew the doodle of a dachshund onto a small canvas, and put him in a garden. I used starker lines than those in my usual style, and coloured the dog a bright blue, while the garden around him was muted. It was fun, and when I finished I put it aside, and went back to my work with renewed vigour. After that, whenever I felt stuck, I used my dachshund to break the block. I painted five over the course of four months, each time a different colour and in a different setting. Nothing would have come of it except that one day, one of the up-and-coming dealers who sold fairly regularly for me – like two or three times a year – popped in to collect stock and saw the little stack of canvases in the corner of my studio.

‘What are these?’ she asked, turning one to face her.

‘Nothing.’ I blushed. The dachshunds felt too easy to be real art, and I was a bit embarrassed by the way they had simply flowed from my brush.

‘I like them,’ said Joanne. ‘Can I take three?’

‘They’re not real art,’ I said, in my panic telling her my real fear.

Joanne laughed, her blonde head thrown back. ‘What the fuck is *real* *art*?’ she said, with a mocking edge. She patted my arm. ‘Let me try with these.’

I shrugged. ‘What the hell. But don’t blame me when nobody takes me seriously ever again.’

‘No offence, angel,’ said Joanne, with what I came to know as her characteristic bluntness, ‘but nobody’s exactly taking you seriously right now.’

Ouch.

To my surprise, Joanne sold those first three Dogs for a good price within two weeks. She doubled the price, and sold the remaining two within another week.

She phoned me at the end of that month. ‘We’re onto something here,’ she said. ‘I’m clearing the gallery, and I want fifty Dogs for a show in two months’ time.’

It shouldn’t have been possible, but they were so easy that I did it. In fact, we had more paintings than we needed, and Joanne got quite frenzied trying to choose her favourites.

‘What do you think we should ask?’ she said.

I named a price, she tripled it, and the whole show sold out. I suddenly had money and, more insanely, was becoming quite famous. Something about those Dogs appealed to people, and magazines and newspapers kept ringing up for interviews. Then it started with radio and TV, and suddenly everyone knew who I was. We did a series of prints to make the Dogs affordable, and we sold greeting cards.

I kept thinking it would pass, or my ability to paint dogs would dry up, but it didn’t. When Amy came, I slowed down a lot – but every Dog I paint still sells.

So when I saw a Dog at Rose’s house, I smiled and pointed at it. It was a small original, but she still would have paid a good price for it.

‘Ah,’ said Rose, ‘my Rebecca Williams. I just wish I could afford more of her work.’

I blushed. I never really know how to do this part.

‘This is a bit embarrassing,’ I said, ‘but I —’

Rose interrupted me. ‘You’ve never heard of her? She’s magnificent! You must see the cards she does. And the big paintings – you’ll die.’

I put my hand on Rose’s arm. ‘Rose, I *have* heard of her. I *am* Rebecca Williams.’

For the first time since I’d met her, Rose was at a loss. Her eyes narrowed slightly. ‘But your surname is Prince,’ she eventually said.

‘That’s my married name. Williams is my maiden name. I became ...’ I stopped. It sounded a bit rude to say ‘I became famous’, so I changed tack. ‘I started the Dogs before I married Sean. So it seemed sensible to keep my maiden name.’

For a moment Rose stood completely still. Then, suddenly, she laughed. ‘*Of course* you’re Rebecca Williams,’ she said. ‘I should have *known* you did something amazing, given how lovely you are. Oh, this is so exciting, I could just die! Let’s have champagne to celebrate you being you.’

I laughed too. ‘I’d have a bit of a problem if I had champagne every time I was me.’

‘Or every time someone discovered that you are you,’ said Rose.

‘It happens less often than you’d think,’ I said, smiling. ‘So it still excites me when it does.’

Actually, that wasn’t the entire truth. It’s true that I still got excited when someone recognised my name, or said something good about my work – but it happened more often than I had ever imagined it would. I’d thought, after the first successful Dog Show exhibition, that if people spoke of me at all it would be in a deprecating way. I thought I’d be regarded as a sort of artistic sell-out, and my Dogs as kitsch that true art collectors wouldn’t touch. But somehow that hasn’t happened. My funny little Dogs are regarded as Serious Art, and I’m regarded as a Person to Know. Joanne calls it the ‘Picasso connection’. There’s a famous little sketch Picasso did of his dachshund, and Joanne has cleverly marketed me in a way that makes it clear that if Picasso drew daxies, then they must be the stuff of Serious Art. Criticise me, and you criticise Picasso.

I’ve been interviewed by one of Joburg’s most feted radio talk-show hosts a number of times, and each time she has said at least three times in the interview: ‘After all, Picasso drew dachshunds.’

And I have answered, as coached by Joanne: ‘There’s actually a long history of great artists drawing their dogs.’ But I follow it with a little laugh to show that I know I’m not really a great artist. Although sometimes I wonder if I’m the only person who knows that. Well, me and Lerato.

But I was glad that Rose was so excited about me, firstly because it’s always nice, but secondly because it made me feel less like the frumpy one in the friendship. And, best of all, it meant that she was a person who knew about art and my world, and I could talk to her about work, and invite her to shows. It added another level to the friendship. Lerato, it must be said, regards the whole business of my success as an extraordinary fluke. She’s right, of course, but I liked the idea of a friend who didn’t actually double over laughing when she heard that I’d sold a painting to a German collector for the same (large) amount she made in a month.

The playdate at Rose went well, and after that we’d meet in the park about once a week, and have playdates at each other’s houses one other afternoon. Rose and I also sometimes met for a coffee in the morning, me feeling guilty that Amy was with Gugu and I wasn’t working, Rose feeling guilty about nothing at all. It became one of those friendships where you feel at home in each other’s houses – a friendship where we could make tea or fetch things for the kids in each other’s kitchens. Maggie and Amy seemed to enjoy each other, and it felt good, this new friendship. I felt happier and more supported than I had since Amy came along.

It was Rose who first suggested we ask Lilith one afternoon.

I’ll be honest, I didn’t want to. I felt possessive of my friendship with Rose – I didn’t want anyone else in our magic circle. But, as Rose pointed out, there was something lonely about Lilith, something needy. And she was good company. The thing was, I was already seeing more of Lilith than Rose was, because I went to the park more often. And Lilith seemed to be there every afternoon.

‘We live in a flat,’ she explained. ‘This is our garden.’

I knew it was small-minded of me not to open my home to her, so I offered to host the first playdate where Lilith and Ruby could join Rose and me and our girls.

