---
title: Good mothers celebrate their children.
---

# Good mothers celebrate their children.
 {:.page-break-after.letter}

The playdate was set for a Thursday afternoon. I saw Lilith at the park on the Monday, and invited her. I already knew that Rose was available, and I SMSed her to confirm as soon as Lilith said she could make it. Rose sent a text back saying: ‘Of course. xxx’

On the Wednesday, I entertained Amy with baking. She loves baking. Her stout little arms mix and stir, and her brow furrows with concentration as she pours out my carefully premeasured ingredients. We made a cake, which at Amy’s insistence we iced pink. Then we made some more grown-up biscuits with raisins and nuts – biscuits that Amy loves to bake but hates to eat. It’s a great recipe that my mom gave me, and I phoned her while they were in the oven because it made me think of her.

‘How’s my munchkin?’ asked Mom as soon as I’d said hi.

Never in her entire mothering of me and Carl did my mother ever refer to us as something so frivolous as a ‘munchkin’. With me, she was a practical but usually somewhat emotionally and physically brittle mother. But with Amy something magical has happened, and she’s like a storybook granny. She kisses and coos and hugs and carries photos of Amy in her wallet. I think it’s partly because she was so glad when we finally stopped fertility treatment, which made me grumpy and hormonal, then manically hopeful, only to crash each time. When we adopted Amy, she was so happy for us, and has never blinked at the fact that Amy is a bit browner than the rest of the family. My father was similarly thrilled, and I think quite delighted that we’d done such a patently politically correct thing as adopt a mixed-race child. He can now hold his own amongst his academic colleagues.

Sean’s mother: different story. Sean’s parents are the sort of people who claim that they never voted for the Nationalist Party, and then add that ‘not all their ideas were wrong, of course.’

‘It’s all very well now,’ says Angela, Sean’s mother, pursing her thin lips. ‘Now we all know that it went peacefully and it’s all fine. But they could have killed us in our beds.’

Then, as one’s jaw falls open, Patrick, Sean’s father, adds, ‘They still will. Mark my words.’

When we adopted Amy, they were horrified. Of course, they didn’t say anything outright. They just made comments.

‘It’s odd how there are so few white babies for adoption, really,’ Angela said to Sean. ‘Afrikaans girls are notoriously promiscuous.’

Patrick said, ‘Surely with Rebecca’s money and connections you could have had first choice?’ as if Amy couldn’t possibly be our first choice.

As Sean has said, it’s difficult to unpack the layers of offensiveness they managed in those two statements. ‘If you sat down and tried to design a sentence that insulted more people in more ways, you actually wouldn’t be able to,’ he’s said.

‘How did you come out of those two?’ I often ask.

‘Boarding school,’ he often answers, morosely.

We shouldn’t have been surprised. They’d been similarly awful about Lerato being my only bridesmaid.

‘Doesn’t Rebecca have many friends?’ Angela had stage whispered to Sean every time she laid eyes on Lerato at the pre-wedding festivities.

It got so bad that Lerato actually took me aside and asked if I was sure I wanted to marry into this family.

‘I most decidedly don’t,’ I’d answered. ‘But I *do* want to marry Sean, so I have no choice.’

‘Fair enough,’ Lerato had said, and had pretended not to speak English the few times Angela or Patrick addressed her.

‘They’ll probably just ask me to clean something,’ she’d said.

Couldn’t argue with that.

It would be an exaggeration to say that we weren’t speaking to Sean’s parents at that point in our lives. Sean phoned once every two weeks – he actually had it programmed into his calendar app so he wouldn’t forget. The conversations were stilted, from what I could hear. We saw them about twice a year, even though they live ten minutes’ drive from us. We’d see them on Sean’s birthday, when they usually came to our house. And we’d see them briefly at some point around Christmas. They never held Amy when she was a baby, they never touched her, and they have yet to remember her birthday. When they saw her, they’d say, ‘Hello Amy,’ as if – well, I was about to say as if she was a pet dog, but they’re actually rather enthusiastic about dogs.

The irony is that I suspect they boasted to their friends about their relationship to Rebecca Williams, the famous artist. Probably not any more, though.

So it’s my parents who have always been Amy’s Granny and Gramps. Plus, my brother, Carl, loves Amy and so does Sean’s sister, Susan, so Amy has a loving aunt and uncle. For the most part, I can’t say she notices the hole that Angela and Patrick Prince have left in her life.

When I phoned my mom after our baking, she’d just bumped into Angela Prince at the shops. I don’t think she would have told me about it if it hadn’t just happened, or if she’d had a chance to tell my dad first. But she told me.

‘I just made your biscuits with Amy,’ I said.

‘I just saw Angela Prince at Woolies,’ she replied. ‘Not the one near me, the one in Hyde Park – it’s the only one where you can get your dad’s mackerel. I really don’t understand why they can’t all have the same stock ...’ Left to her own devices, my mom can sidetrack herself a thousand times, and there was a chance I’d never hear the thing about Angela.

‘So how was Angela?’ I asked.

Mom took a deep breath – one I recognised as a pre-rant wind-up.

‘That woman,’ she said, ‘that woman is a bitch, Rebecca. There’s no getting around it, and I’m not one to use that word lightly.’ The last part wasn’t quite true, but I let it pass.

‘What did she say?’ I asked.

‘She said,’ Mom took a deep breath, ‘she said that she’d heard about an adoption agency that brings little blonde Russian children to South Africa, and that maybe you could – and I quote, Rebecca – she said, “Maybe they could trade Amy.”’

‘Oh God, Mom. You have *got* to be making that up.’

‘Do you think I could make up this ... this ... this *shit*?’

I got Mom off the phone finally, after promising her many times that I wasn’t upset by what she’d told me, and that I wouldn’t tell Angela that she’d told me.

‘To tell Angela,’ I said, ‘I would have to speak to her. And Sean’s birthday has just been, so we’re safe till Christmas.’

‘You’re a saint the way you put up with her, Rebecca,’ concluded my mother, as if I’d just said we saw Angela twice a week instead of twice a year.

The truth is, I was very upset.

I don’t know why; it’s not like I don’t expect it of Angela. But I hated the thought of *anyone* thinking of Amy in those terms. I suppose it went to the heart of all my insecurities: that Amy was less mine than a biological child would be.

I phoned Lerato after my mom, Amy in a baking-induced nap.

The thing about an old friend, unlike a new friend like Rose, is that you don’t have to explain. When Lerato answered the phone, I said, ‘My mother-in-law is a bitch.’

Lerato took a moment and then said, ‘The gestation period of an elephant is two years.’

‘Huh?’

‘I thought we were playing a game,’ said Lerato, her voice floating on one of her wide smiles. ‘You know: you say a fact, I say a fact.’

I laughed. ‘You’re funny,’ I told her.

‘Laugh-a-minute Lerato, they call me,’ she said. ‘Listen, I’d love to stay and chat but I’ve got a funeral so I have to run and fetch cupcakes.’

‘Oh,’ I said, ‘I’m sorry. Who died?’

Lerato took a deep breath. ‘My mother’s cousin’s aunt on the other side’s brother-in-law.’

Lerato gets very upset when people call her a coconut. ‘How can I be a coconut when I go to all the funerals?’ she argues. And indeed, she does. But the thing with these funerals is that she’s supposed to take food – a bucket of scones seems to be the expected contribution. A few years ago, Lerato took a stand against tradition, and took fifty cupcakes instead. Her mother was mortified but the cupcakes went down very well with the younger crowd, and there was nearly a cat fight when her cousin Glory and her aunt Zanele reached for the last cupcake at the same time. So now Lerato takes about two hundred cupcakes, which costs her a fortune, even though the lady at The Patisserie gives her a discount. Once, Lerato and I made the cupcakes. It was a disaster, and Glory (Lerato and I call Glory ‘Glory Be’, and she’s rather a big woman who’s in no need of more baked goods) threatened to put sangoma muti on Lerato if she tried that again.

So that’s why I couldn’t talk more to Lerato, and when Sean came home, I didn’t have the heart to talk to him about his revolting parents because he was, as was becoming usual, a bit stressed out.

Sean and his business partner, Adam, had just left good jobs in IT to start up on their own. They invent apps for phones, and had already done some rather funky things. But they’d had a big contract with one of the banks that was suddenly looking shaky, and Sean was worried. Angela’s poison would have made him angry on top of it, which is a bad combination.

So instead, I’d tried to let him talk to me about work, use me as a sounding board, but Amy was all over the place, interrupting us every time we opened our mouths.

Sean raised his eyebrows at me. ‘Did she sleep this afternoon?’

I felt attacked. Our agreed strategy was to stop her sleeping in the day so that she fell asleep at night, but it wasn’t always possible. And frankly I needed the break too.

‘Leave her with Gugu,’ Sean said when I brought this up. He didn’t understand the terrible guilt I felt whenever I left her.

So I got defensive. ‘Yes, she slept,’ I said. ‘Want to try spending all day every day with a toddler and see how well *you* do with the no-sleep plan?’

It probably would have erupted into a full-on fight, but Amy distracted us by barrelling down the passage into Sean’s legs yelling, ‘Dada!’ The moment passed, and by the time she was asleep that evening, I was too tired to fight *or* to talk about Angela.

***

The next day, the day of the playdate with Lilith, Rose cancelled.

I knew she felt bad, because she phoned me instead of texting. ‘Darling, I am so sorry,’ she said. ‘My goddam brother has arrived from London and I need to entertain him.’

‘I understand,’ I said, because that’s what I’ve been brought up to say, but the truth is that I didn’t understand at all. Surely she’d known that her brother was coming before that morning? I mean, surely that would have been a long-term arrangement? People don’t even pop in from down the road any more, let alone from London. In her shoes, I would never have agreed to the playdate in the first place, but people seem to do this type of thing the whole time these days, making me think that I’m the one in the wrong.

I sent Lilith a message saying, ‘Rose can’t make it this arvi. Raincheck if u prefer?’

But she answered almost immediately saying, ‘Fine just us. Looking fwd. ‘

I felt awful, because I was now dreading it more than ever. If Rose was there, then between her exuberant personality and her funny stories and all the children, the day would float. But Ruby and Amy were quieter children without Maggie, and somehow the idea of Lilith out of the context of the park made me anxious.

Lilith arrived exactly on time, driving her slightly battered old BMW up our long driveway. Probably the most personal thing that I knew about her was that her BMW was inherited from her father, who died before Ruby was born. I decided that, all else failing, I would at least use the afternoon as an opportunity to find out more about Lilith.

Once Lilith had unloaded Ruby from the car, she looked around her with an open curiosity that was so unusual it cheered me up. Normally, new people take in your home with scattered furtive glances, but Lilith looked around with her hands on her hips and her eyes so wide open you could see the whites all the way around.

‘This is *nice*,’ she said, decisively.

Ruby stood next to her and imitated her pose.

‘Thanks,’ I said. ‘Come in and see the rest.’

Lilith’s smile brought a fan of wrinkles to the translucent skin on her nose, and I thought not for the first time what a beautiful woman she was, but in an understated way.

‘I love seeing people’s houses,’ she said. ‘Especially now that I live in a flat. It’s lovely being reminded of the alternative.’

From anyone else that would have sounded bitter, but Lilith seemed so happy that it somehow felt like a real compliment. I would have expected to feel defensive after a statement like that, but something about Lilith made it okay. She took Ruby by the hand and we went inside.

As we walked into the house Amy appeared, almost panting with the effort of running down the passage to welcome Ruby, grabbed Ruby’s arm and yelled, ‘Come see Seraffy!’ Introducing her friend to her beloved Gugu seemed to be Amy’s first stop, and Ruby went along happily. For the first time since I’d met them, Lilith allowed Ruby out of her sight.

Across from the front door is a wall with passages leading off from either side, and I’ve filled the wall with family photos. The photos we’d had done professionally when Amy was a baby used to dominate, but I’d recently replaced most of them with canvases of newer family photos. In the middle was a lovely photo that my mom had taken of Sean, Amy and I.

Lilith peered at the wall.

‘I love that you have this at your entrance – a total celebration of your family,’ she said.

I felt a bit uncomfortable. The truth is, I’m never sure if it’s really, well, tasteful to have so many family photos so prominently displayed. I suppose part of this is my worry about Real Art, and the impression it makes when an artist has photos instead of a painting in pride of place.

‘Thanks,’ I said to Lilith, knowing she wasn’t judging me as I judged myself.

‘Who’s that?’ she asked, pointing at Sean. ‘Your brother?’

‘No,’ I laughed. ‘It’s my husband.’

Lilith looked completely confused. ‘But he’s white,’ she said. ‘Is Amy from a previous relationship?’

I took a moment to even understand what she meant.

‘Amy’s adopted,’ I said. ‘Surely you knew that?’

Lilith looked at me. ‘Oh God,’ she said, eventually. ‘You must think I’m so stupid. It never crossed my mind that she wasn’t your biological child. She looks like you, and sounds like you, and you two have such a clear bond.’

Intellectually, I knew that this mistake was possible. We’d been told that Amy’s biological mom was white, so it would have been perfectly logical for people to think she was my biological daughter. But I’d never actually spoken to anyone who’d made this mistake. I felt elated, freed from the bad feelings after my mom’s news of Angela. Lilith looked so embarrassed, a slow blush was creeping up her neck, and I spontaneously hugged her thin body to mine.

‘Thank you,’ I said. ‘I needed that.’

‘So tell me the story,’ said Lilith. ‘How did you come to adopt Amy?’

This was the magic of Lilith. From anyone else the question might have felt intrusive, but Lilith asked it with the same frank curiosity with which she’d surveyed my home and family photos. So as I made tea, I told her the story.

I told her about my endometriosis, and Sean’s low sperm count. I told her about the drugs, and then the four rounds of artificial insemination. I told her about the six unsuccessful IVF cycles, and all the little embryos we made that died when they were put back in my body. I told her about the lift of hope we felt with each new cycle, and the crushing defeat we felt with each failure. I told her how the money had run out and, more to the point, that so had our strength for the intrusive, pointless treatments.

I told her how we’d waited and waited for Amy after we’d applied to adopt, doing paperwork, and medical and psychological tests. I told her how we resented people who could just make a baby – and the fact that nobody worried about whether *they* would be good enough parents.

And then I told her about when we got Amy and how complete she made me, and Lilith lifted her cup of tea and said, ‘In celebration of Amy.’

I wiped away a tear that had escaped, and returned the toast. In celebration of Amy indeed.

‘So,’ said Lilith after we’d peeped in at the girls playing dolls on the floor of Amy’s room. They each had a doll that they were feeding and chatting happily to, ignoring each other for the most part. ‘So, will you be adopting another child?’

It was strange that she asked me this – a question that no one, not even my mom or Lerato, had asked. And strange that she should ask it then, so soon after Sean had brought up the subject.

‘We’ve talked about it,’ I said. ‘But Sean wants us to give IVF another try before we apply to adopt again.’

Lilith raised her eyebrows slightly, but said nothing.

‘He says it’s no reflection on Amy, but that he wants to give it another shot.’

‘Fair enough,’ said Lilith, but I didn’t agree. When Sean had suggested this to me, in his reasonable voice, I’d felt outraged on Amy’s behalf. I felt like he was rejecting her, and rejecting us as being Amy’s parents – the only identity that still mattered to me.

‘It’s not that at all,’ Sean had said, not getting angry despite my raised voice. ‘I just want to try again. You can paint a big Dog to pay for it, and you’re still young enough to have an easy pregnancy.’

‘Easy for you,’ I’d spat at him. ‘It’s not your body.’ Although for me the issue had never been the physical challenges of IVF, and Sean knew it.

‘Let’s do one cycle,’ he’d suggested. ‘Give me one cycle, and after that we can talk again.’

‘I think that makes sense,’ Lilith said now.

‘But what if it works?’ I voiced my secret fear. ‘What if we have a baby? What if Sean loves it more than he loves Amy?’ I dropped my voice, and somehow found the courage to ask the question that kept me awake the night before. ‘What if *I* love it more than Amy?’

Lilith laughed, and I felt momentarily affronted. Then she said, ‘Rebecca, I cannot imagine anyone loving any child more than you love Amy. And I think you know that in your heart.’ She took a sip of tea. ‘Anyway, from what I understand about having a second child, there’s always that risk. You might love a second adopted child more too.’

I thought about it, and realised she was right.

‘There are all sorts of variables,’ said Lilith. ‘Like, it might be a boy, and that would also be different.’

I nodded. True again.

‘If I were you,’ said Lilith, ‘I’d focus on the challenge that faces any mother of two. That you make them both feel special, and both feel loved.’ She looked at me, almost speculatively. ‘I think you can do that, Rebecca. I really do.’

And somehow, when she said it, I believed it.

It was only later that evening that I realised I hadn’t asked Lilith anything about herself.

Oh well, I thought, next time.

