---
title: Good mothers are good listeners.
---

# Good mothers are good listeners.
{:.page-break-after}

Rose was waiting for us at the restaurant, fiddling with her phone as if it contained all the secrets of the universe if only she could push the right button. She stood up when she saw us, and we spent a confused few minutes greeting each other and deciding who would sit where – hardly brain surgery as there were only three of us, but somehow it seemed important. It always strikes me as strange, the greetings of women. At the park, Rose, Lilith and I would never hug or kiss, and at the flat, Lilith and I had not embraced, but now we both kissed Rose on the cheek before we sat down, Lilith in the middle, Rose and I across from each other

Rose launched into a detailed story about her unexpected visit from her mother and having to leave Maggie behind, and from the way that Lilith nodded, I knew she knew Rose was lying. And then Rose cottoned on that Amy was with Ruby and Mrs Clarke, and gave me such a startled look that I was sure Lilith would pick up that I’d also planned to leave Amy at home. I wanted to just melt into my rather hard designer chair. Instead, I glued a gormless smile to my face and tried not to look guilty.

As Rose’s explanation finally petered out, there was an awkward moment where nobody had anything to say, but then the waiter saved us and we ordered wine, feeling (at least in my case) like a naughty schoolgirl. I told the others this, and it broke the tension, and then we started trading the usual stories about our week of parenting. Rose told a story about some thoughtless parenting action of the husband of a friend of hers, and I topped it with a story about how I’d asked Sean to buy nappies on his way home, and not only had he not known what size Amy wears, but he’d also not known what brand we use.

‘How can he be so oblivious?’ I demanded of my friends, taking a huge swig of wine.

Rose nodded sympathetically, but Lilith said, ‘At least he bought the nappies.’

That stopped us. Because although we knew that Lilith was a single mom, neither of us had the least idea why. And here was our chance. I knew Rose well enough to know that she was searching for the right words to ask, and I left it to her, knowing that I’d make a hash of it if I tried. Lilith saved us both the embarrassment.

‘I’m sure you’ve wondered about Ruby-Mae’s father,’ she said.

There’s no right answer. ‘Yes’ and you sound nosy; ‘no’ and you sound uncaring. We both made neutral noises and busied ourselves with invisible fluff on the table cloth.

Lilith took a sip of her wine, and the waiter arrived with our food. I was petrified that the distraction would stop her telling us, but it almost seemed like she was determined to get the story out. It was as if, for Lilith, this was the whole point of our lunch. In retrospect, maybe it was.

‘You must understand,’ she started. She put her fork into her penne as if to eat, but then abandoned it there. ‘He was a bad man. That’s the most important thing for you to understand.’

As she spoke, she unthinkingly rubbed a crescent-shaped scar that I’d often noticed on her arm. This was the first time I’d seen her touch it.

‘At the beginning, he seemed very charming,’ she said. ‘If he walked in and sat down with us now, you’d find him lovely. At least for a bit. And good-looking.’ She smiled at the memory. ‘Very good-looking, I’ll give him that.’ She sighed, and carried on. ‘I grew up in Durban, but I moved to Port Elizabeth and I didn’t know many people there, and I was working too hard to make many friends. My parents were killed in a car accident about a month before I met him, and I was feeling very alone.’

Rose and I made sympathetic sounds. I knew her father had died, but nothing about her mother, and I found myself wondering if the old BMW was the car that they’d died in. I could easily have got sidetracked, but Lilith waved aside our sympathetic noises and half-formed questions.

‘I was working in a big gallery when I met Ron, just as a receptionist. He used to come in whenever he had a break, and look at the art, and tell me how one day he was going to be a player, a rich guy, someone who owned good paintings. He seemed like a guy with a plan, with a vision.’ Lilith paused and sipped her wine. ‘I guess I was a classic victim. No parents, an only child, a few friends who were easily shaken off. Ron saw me coming.’

Rose looked as if she was about to interrupt, and I held my breath, willing her not to break the flow. But she just said, ‘Oh dear,’ and Lilith continued.

‘What makes me angry is that he wasn’t even rich or powerful, like abusive men in books. I didn’t stay for his money, or because he had friends who’d hurt me if I left, or because he was clever enough to track me down. I just stayed because I was a fool.’

‘You were vulnerable,’ said Rose, and I wished I was like her, that I could find the right thing to say in a situation like this.

‘On one level I know that,’ said Lilith. ‘But it’s pathetic. I have no patience with women who act like I did.’

We were silent for a moment, and then she shrugged.

‘The day I found out I was pregnant I felt completely trapped. I knew I couldn’t bring a baby into the violence that was my life, but I didn’t know if I’d find the strength to leave. I thought maybe I’d just quietly have an abortion.’ She looked down at her hands for a moment, and Rose was about to speak, but I reached out and touched her arm, giving a small shake of my head.

‘Ron worked as a waiter – he was actually very good at it, with his looks and charm. But he hated it, hated people telling him what to do. Hated that people would spend on their lunch what he sometimes earned in a day. The worse his day, the worse he treated me.’ She sighed. ‘He must have had a really bad day that day, because no sooner was he through the door than he started attacking me. All I could think was that I had to protect the baby, so I curled into a little ball to protect my stomach, and I concentrated on not passing out. Eventually, he stopped and left.’

Lilith rubbed the scar on her arm again.

‘I had no one to call. Nowhere to go. So I crawled to the phone and called an ambulance, just before I passed out.’ She took a deep breath, and looked at us. ‘I got better. I came to Johannesburg. I made a new life. And, thank God, Ruby-Mae was unharmed. I know he’s out there somewhere, looking for me. But he’s not rich, and he’s not smart. It’s not like in the movies. I don’t think he’ll find me.’

I wasn’t sure who she was trying to convince, herself or us. But I took her hand and squeezed it. ‘You’re so brave,’ I said. ‘You saved your daughter.’

‘I guess I did,’ said Lilith. ‘Now I just have to make sure that I can keep saving her.’

‘You do,’ said Rose. ‘Every day.’

Lilith smiled. ‘I guess I do,’ she said, but her voice sounded empty. She took a deep breath. ‘Anyhow,’ she said, her voice falsely bright, ‘I just wanted you guys to know the story. And to understand that there’s no situation on earth that would make Ruby-Mae’s father a positive thing in her life.’

‘Lilith,’ I said, ‘we would never suggest that you let Ruby-Mae spend time with a man like that. Sometimes no father is better than a bad father.’

‘Is Sean a good father?’ asked Lilith, and I was quite taken aback by her forthrightness. But I told myself that she’d just shared a part of her life, so maybe the usual boundaries had fallen away.

‘He’s an excellent father,’ I said, choosing my words carefully. ‘Some men struggle with adoption, but Sean hasn’t. He’s not a perfect husband,’ I added, with a nervous laugh. ‘Although from what you’ve just said, maybe I should count my blessings.’

‘What’s wrong with him as a husband?’ asked Lilith, and I could see that Rose was feeling slightly awkward – probably wondering what confidences she’d be asked to share, and how she would sidetrack the conversation.

I felt disloyal saying anything bad about Sean, although I’d been dissing him minutes before. Maybe I felt a bit foolish after Lilith’s story.

‘Oh, the usual,’ I said. ‘His life has carried on after Amy. Mine hasn’t. And now this new go at IVF, but not a thought to helping me a bit more.’ My voice had risen slightly, and I consciously dropped it. ‘Lilith, it sounds so petty. He’s a good man, really. A good husband.’

‘What’s good about him?’ she said.

I shrugged. ‘He’s funny,’ I ventured, ‘and kind.’ I smiled. ‘And clever. And ambitious. And supportive. ‘ I was suddenly feeling rather fond of my husband, and probably could have gone on spelling out his virtues now that Lilith’s story had put things into perspective.

‘And Aidan?’ said Lilith, turning to Rose. ‘Is Aidan a good husband?’

‘Aidan’s fine,’ said Rose. ‘Much like Sean, I guess. Good enough.’ She laughed as if she’d said something funny, then stopped. ‘Aidan’s fine,’ she repeated. Something about her voice told us that the topic was closed, and I desperately searched my mind for something to change the subject to. But Lilith seemed prepared.

‘So,’ she said, leaning forward, ‘do either of you have the name of a good swimming school?’

The conversation segued easily from swimming schools to other children’s activities. Lilith mentioned her job as a doctor’s receptionist, which allowed her to send Ruby-Mae to crèche in the morning, and spend afternoons at home with her. I talked a bit about my work, and the challenges of painting and mothering, because I can’t disappear into a painting like I used to. Rose told us that she was a trained beautician – which I found unexpected. Not because she isn’t beautiful, but because I’d somehow presumed that she’d studied something quite cerebral – I had English Literature in my head for some reason. I said so, and for a moment I couldn’t tell if the comment pleased Rose or offended her. But she laughed, and the conversation moved on.

Still, by the time I picked up a tired but happy Amy, I felt exhausted – and a bit like I’d spent the morning in the headmistress’s office – although I couldn’t put my finger on why.

