---
title: Good mothers have birthday parties.
---

# Good mothers have birthday parties.
 {:.page-break-after.letter}

Around the time that we started fertility treatment again, it seemed to be birthday party season for me and my park friends, although as the weather got colder we were spending less time at the park, and more time at Rose and my homes. We’d had tea at Lilith’s flat, but the three girls had found it a bit cramped, and Lilith had reluctantly suggested that maybe she shouldn’t try to play host. Instead, she often bought a cake or sweetly iced cupcakes that she got at cost from the shop downstairs, because they weren’t perfect enough for some child’s party. The girls loved that – seeing the different things they could get. Barney one week, flowers the next.

Amy’s birthday is at the beginning of May – in fact, we love the conceit of having her name an anagram of the word ‘May’. Ruby-Mae is at the end of May and it turned out that her birth month had also played a part in her name. And then Maggie is towards the end of June, and Lilith and I teased Rose that Maggie’s name should have been June. She laughed, but seemed a bit offended at the same time, and said that month names were ‘stupid’, apparently without realising she might be offending us.

For Amy’s first birthday we’d invited everybody we knew – everybody in the world, it felt like – and we’d had an enormous lunch party with a jumping castle and a lamb on the spit.

‘I suppose it’s really more a celebration for us,’ I’d said to my mom over Amy’s sleeping head at the party.

‘No kidding,’ my mom had agreed, looking around.

I’d gone to the other extreme for Amy’s second birthday: it was just us and family. Carl came, and Sean’s sister, Susan. My parents, of course. We invited the Princes, but they had a ‘pre-existing arrangement’. On their granddaughter’s birthday. Anyway, Amy was actually awake this party, and enjoyed it, and her presents. I slightly regretted making it so low key.

And now she was turning three. My down-haired chocolate angel was now a great big three year old who was so excited about her birthday. This year, I’d decided to make it all about the children. I suppose this seems self-evident to lots of people, but I know I hadn’t been alone in getting my own needs confused with those of my child when it came to birthday parties.

So I spoke to my friends, and especially Rose and Lilith, about different ideas, and the things we thought toddlers enjoyed most, and the most successful and unsuccessful parties we’d been to. Lilith was the only one who had a child at crèche, so she’d already been to a whole variety of parties, and was an amazing source of ideas. Eventually, at her suggestion, I settled on the ubiquitous jumping castle, and a mobile farmyard with bunnies. Amy asked for a Hello Kitty cake, so I made the whole thing a Hello Kitty theme, and ran myself ragged looking for Hello Kitty party plates and banners and party packs and favours.

‘It’s a three year old’s party,’ said Sean mildly, after I’d spent half an hour telling him how hard it was to find Hello Kitty serviettes. ‘And anyway, shouldn’t you be taking it easy?’

We’d done the AI and were now in the waiting period – two weeks before I could do a pregnancy test.

‘Dr Stevenson said to carry on as usual,’ I said, feeling defensive.

‘You don’t usually drive yourself mad organising the party of the century,’ Sean said, but he laughed as he said it, and I felt better.

‘I don’t usually have a daughter turning three,’ I countered.

We smiled at each other. ‘Three,’ he said. ‘Seems like just yesterday we got her. What a happy day.’

‘Let’s celebrate that day too,’ I suddenly said.

‘You want to have a party on her birthday and then three months later on the day we got her?’ asked Sean, his brow furrowed.

I laughed. ‘No,’ I said. ‘I’m not that nuts. But let’s, as a family, mark that day too. It’ll make her aware of her adoption as a positive thing, and as part of our lives.’

Sean thought for a moment. ‘Cool,’ he said. ‘I guess in a way that’s really the day that changed our lives.’

For a moment I was back there, at the foster home, finally being allowed to take the baby that I had been visiting for three weeks home with me, finally being allowed to believe she was mine. I looked at Sean, and I could see that he was also reliving it. We smiled, and squeezed hands.

The party list was a challenge though. I’d been determined that we’d only invite people who actually meant something to Amy – adults who were involved with her often, or children that we played with. Still, in the end, there were about twenty-five children of various ages coming and about thirty adults.

‘Fucking circus,’ Sean said mildly when I told him the figures.

‘Not a circus,’ I countered. ‘I haven’t asked your parents.’

‘Very funny,’ said Sean.

Bizarrely, a week before Amy’s birthday, and the day before I was due to do a pregnancy test, Angela phoned Sean. It was after eight, and I was sitting on the couch next to him, reading.

‘Are you doing anything for Amy’s birthday?’ she apparently asked.

‘Yes.’ Sean didn’t volunteer anything more.

‘Well, you and Rebecca seemed angry when we couldn’t come last year, so we thought we’d check in advance this year.’

‘A week is hardly advance,’ Sean said, although he told me that up till that point he’d been quite touched that his mother had actually remembered Amy’s birthday, and that she wanted to be included. She’d promptly ruined the moment by saying that she thought Amy’s birthday was in June.

‘It’s so hard to remember because she wasn’t actually born,’ Angela Prince had apparently observed.

Sean put the phone down and turned to me. ‘You know what, Rebecca?’ he said.

‘What?’

‘I think I might be done with those people.’

‘What people?’

‘My parents.’

‘Even if we find out tomorrow that we’ve made them a ‘real’ grandchild?’ I gestured the apostrophes in the air.

‘They *have* a real grandchild,’ said Sean. ‘If they’re too stupid to see that, I don’t want them to be part of *any* of our children’s lives.’

I hugged him, feeling a small sense of relief that Angela wouldn’t be at Amy’s party, and a large sense of relief that she might actually be out of my life for real.

***

The next morning I woke up early – before Amy, which was almost physically impossible back then. I felt the weight of all Sean’s hopes settle in my stomach as I took out the home pregnancy test I’d bought in preparation for this moment. Regardless of the result, I had to go into the clinic for a blood test that morning, but experience had taught me that it was better to do the home test first and be prepared for the worst.

The instructions say that you should pee on the stick, but despite the numerous tests I’ve done, I can never get that right. Instead, I peed into a container filched from the gynae’s rooms for this purpose, and I stuck the papery end of the test into my yellow morning urine. Once I saw that the test window was wet, I placed the test flat on the floor and closed my eyes.

You have to wait three minutes, and I counted. I counted to one hundred and eighty slowly, and then opened my eyes.

There was only one line. Negative.

Sean was waiting outside the door.

‘And?’ he said. I shook my head slightly, trying hard not to loosen the tears I was holding back. ‘Could be too early for a home test to work?’ he said, with a questioning lilt.

He was right – it could. But I knew that it wasn’t. I wasn’t pregnant, and I felt like a fool for even allowing myself to hope.

Sean came with me to the clinic anyway, and sat through the wait for the blood test – remarkably quick, but it still felt like hours. And when the test came back negative, he held my hand and said, ‘It’s okay, we tried. We don’t have to do the IVF as well.’

Three weeks before, I would have said that this was all I wanted to hear. But something had shifted.

‘No,’ I said. ‘I want to try the IVF again. This was just a shot in the dark – the IVF will be a proper try.’

In his room a bit later, Dr Stevenson was disappointed for us, but admitted that with our history, an AI was unlikely to have worked. ‘But stranger things have happened,’ he said before I could ask why he’d made us go through a process that was expensive and pointless. We told him that we wanted to do the IVF, and he smiled and said, ‘No time like the present – let’s start this cycle.’

We agreed, somewhat cautiously on my part, and he took me through the IVF procedures again. Sean and I then went together to collect the bag of drugs and injections from the clinic pharmacy. Despite the disappointment I felt at not being pregnant, I was filled with a sudden and unexpected optimism.

***

The day of Amy’s party was one of those perfect early-winter days that you only get in Joburg. The morning bite of cold gave way to a clear-skied, sunny day that was warm enough for the children to play happily outside. Not for the first time I thought how glad I was that we’d never given in to the temptation to emigrate away from Joburg’s challenges, and that we could still count the Highveld weather as one of our blessings.

Amy’s party was enormous and overwhelming – full of screaming, sugar-high children and talking, drinking, eating parents. It was only a few hours, but at one point I thought it would never end. At about that moment, I glanced over to where Lilith was standing watching Ruby. Ruby was playing with the bunnies, and Lilith was sipping a glass of orange juice, her eyes focused on her daughter, but not really seeing her. There was something far away about her expression, as if she was somewhere far sadder than a three year old’s party. At the time, I wondered if she was thinking about her dead parents and Ruby’s father, as my parents and husband were so much in evidence. I also wondered if she was comparing what we had given Amy to what she could offer Ruby.

The other thing I remember about Lilith that day is how long she spent speaking to Sean. They’d met before that, briefly, but that was the first time she’d had a chance to really talk to him. And she’d certainly done that, almost cornering him, asking him question after question about himself. I had a moment of wondering if she might actually be coming on to him – she was, after all, a single woman, and Sean is an attractive man. Perhaps she’d decided that I didn’t appreciate him and that he deserved a better wife. I allowed the idea to float briefly, but then mentally chastised myself. Lilith simply wasn’t that type of woman. And if she was looking for a husband, there were several single dads at the party who would surely have been simpler options.

‘She’s nice,’ Sean said cautiously after the party, while he and I cleared up, helped by Lerato, who’d popped in at the end. ‘But she’s a bit intense.’ He paused, searching for the right words. ‘I felt a bit like I was being interviewed for a job. A really hectic job.’

‘She is a bit like that,’ I agreed, thinking of how I’d felt when I first met her. ‘Nosy, but in a kind of lovely way.’

‘She’s nuts,’ Lerato said with a dismissive wave of her hand.

‘You barely spoke to her,’ I argued. ‘Plus, you never like anybody.’

‘S’true I never like anybody,’ said Lerato. ‘But I did speak to her. And she’s nuts.’ I was about to say something but Lerato carried on. ‘Loves her child though,’ she said, as if this was an unusual and not quite understandable emotion. ‘And she seemed very pleased that I’m a lawyer. Said you were lucky to have a friend who’s a lawyer. So maybe she’s not completely nuts.’

‘She’d change her mind if she knew what a grumpy-assed lawyer my friend is,’ I said, giving Lerato a look. ‘Although I concede,’ I added, leaning against her, ‘that I *am* lucky to have you.’

***

Ruby-Mae’s party two weeks later was a contrast to Amy’s, although not in the way that I had expected. Lilith spent a great deal of money on it – more, I’ll be honest, than I would have thought she could afford.

She rented the party room at the kids’ art space down the road from her – a place I love in theory, but find too pricey in practice. The room was beautifully decorated and the children were given quite complicated art projects to do: too complicated for three year olds, but they had fun covering themselves and their surroundings in glitter. The cake came from the shop downstairs from her, and she confided in me that they’d done it for free. It was exceptional: a cake in the shape of a fairy, with intricate icing and little sugar flowers all over it. Around the base it said, ‘Happy 3rd birthday Fairy Princess Ruby-Mae!’, and the dots of the ‘i’s were tiny flowers. Amy gasped with pleasure when she saw it.

But the party showed us more clearly than anything else how small Lilith’s world was. Of course, Rose and I knew that Lilith had no family – but it really came home to both of us quite how alone Lilith and Ruby-Mae were. Lilith had decided not to invite all the children from Ruby-Mae’s crèche.

‘I only want the people who matter to her,’ Lilith had said, echoing my own plans, but applying it much more strictly.

So it was Rose and me and our girls, and one child from crèche, who was Ruby-Mae’s best friend there. The mother seemed nice, but she kept her distance from Rose and me, regarding us, I thought, with deep suspicion. Mrs Clarke was there in her enormous glory, and a little girl called Amelia, who turned out to be the child of one of the cleaners at the downstairs bakery. Ruby-Mae and Amelia often played together, and Amelia was a sweet little thing. But that was all. These were all the people who were important to Ruby-Mae, and it broke my heart.

Amy was particularly taken with Amelia. She wrapped her arms around her and squeezed her, and touched her hair. She abandoned her usual pursuit of Maggie and Ruby in favour of following Amelia around the room, and trying to copy whatever she did. Eventually Amy sidled over to me, and pulled me down to her level.

‘Mommy,’ she said in my ear, her face tangling in my wild hair. ‘Mom, that girl is brown like me.’

It was the first time Amy had said anything about being a different colour, and it upset me because I knew it was the first step on a long and complicated path. I also knew that my job as her mother was to make that path as smooth as possible, so I smiled and said, ‘Yes. Beautiful and brown, just like you.’ I waited for her to say more, to ask more questions, but she just nodded, and went back to Amelia.

Lilith seemed a bit put out by Amy’s interest in Amelia.

‘Amy sure seems to like Amelia,’ she said with a smile that didn’t reach her eyes.

I wasn’t sure if she was upset that Amy wasn’t playing with Ruby, or that Amelia wasn’t. Either way, I felt like I wanted to explain that they’re just toddlers, that their interest in people will wax and wane. But I didn’t think Lilith needed that at this party of carefully chosen friends. Instead I said, ‘She likes her brown-ness,’ my voice low.

Lilith was nonplussed. ‘Oh,’ she said, the edge of something that wasn’t quite anger now gone from her voice. ‘You wouldn’t think that would matter to her.’

I sighed. ‘Today it seems to have made an impression.’

We both silently watched the girls, battling our own particular parental worries. Mine about Amy’s long road of racial confusion. Lilith’s, I imagined, about Amy not playing with Ruby-Mae.

‘Come,’ Lilith said eventually, elbowing me. ‘Let’s grab a glass of wine.’

I looked around. ‘From where?’ I asked.

‘I’ve got one stashed.’ She smiled.

‘Lead the way,’ I said, deciding that a glass of wine in these early stages of my fertility cycle was just what the doctor ordered.

