---
title: Good mothers use their support systems.
---

# Good mothers use their support systems.
 {:.page-break-after.letter}

Something strange happened at the park a short time after the birthday parties

I remember it was a cold day, the beginning of June. The park was emptier, the surroundings starker, and those of us who braved it were wrapped up warm. I can’t remember why Lilith and I decided to go that day instead of letting the girls play at my house. Maybe I was sick of being at home, and aching for fresh air. But I do remember that Lilith seemed keen, and my recollection is that going to the park was as much my idea as hers.

We arrived at about the same time, and I saw Lilith driving past me, parking amongst the trees at the top of the road rather than in full view, where we both usually parked. I meant to ask her about it, but the thought passed and by the time we had the children at the swings, we were both exchanging views on how cold it was and how foolish we were to be at the park, and how difficult it is to keep children indoors in this weather. Lilith laughed and showed me that she had a bag with her, full of ‘extra jerseys’. I teased her about it, because Ruby-Mae was wrapped up like an Eskimo child, her face flushed with warmth where it was visible between her beanie and scarf.

‘Don’t know where you’d put another jersey,’ I said. ‘Although,’ I added, pointing at Amy, who’d decided to only wear a thin Hello Kitty pullover, and nothing I’d said or done could change her mind, ‘maybe I’ll need to borrow one.’

We were sitting near the slides, which Ruby-Mae and Amy were racing up and sliding down, Ruby-Mae with a scarf trailing behind her. Lilith asked me about work, and I talked a bit about a big painting I was busy with – to pay for the IVF, actually.

‘It must be nice to know you can bring in that type of money when you need to,’ observed Lilith, but she sounded wistful rather than jealous.

‘It is nice,’ I said, because what was the point of denying it.

She talked a bit about her morning at work and some of the patients who had made her laugh, and then looked at Ruby-Mae.

‘That scarf,’ she said, clambering to her feet. ‘Better tuck it in.’

I watched her go over to Ruby, and tuck in the scarf. She took her time: unwinding it first, then wrapping it around Ruby-Mae’s neck so that no skin was exposed, and then tucking the ends into Ruby-Mae’s thick outer coat. When it was done, she knelt down and wrapped her arms around Ruby-Mae, kissing her little face all over.

‘Mommy loves you,’ I heard her say. ‘Mommy loves you so, so much.’

‘Rebecca,’ she said when she came back to me. ‘I’m totally desperate for the toilet. Can I run up to the public loos while you watch the kids?’

‘Sure,’ I said, thinking how desperate she must have been to contemplate the general filth and menace of the public toilets. We’d often joked that we’d rather wet our pants, but I guessed that when it came to it, that wasn’t true. And she did look really uncomfortable, almost like she was in pain.

‘Be careful,’ I said smiling and Lilith shrugged, looking distressed.

‘Needs must,’ she said.

I watched her walk up to the gap in the trees that led to the toilets, and then I looked back at the girls, who were playing some complicated game which involved Amy hiding behind the slide and pretending to be a bear. Ruby-Mae went up and down the slide, and Amy tried to catch her.

I glanced at my watch. It was ten to four. I decided that as soon as Lilith came back, I’d leave. I still needed to shop, and cook supper. My mind drifted back to the painting I was working on, and I had a sudden vision of how I wanted it to look. Luckily, and quite unusually, I had my bag with a notebook, so I grabbed it and made a sketch, glancing at the girls every so often. Absorbed in a question of placement – whether the the dog should be full centre or to the side – I made a few sketches. Suddenly Ruby-Mae was in front of me.

‘Where’s my mommy?’ she asked.

‘At the toilet,’ I said, glancing at my watch. It was ten past four. Lilith had been gone for twenty minutes. My heart constricted. Twenty minutes is a long time to spend in the public toilets.

‘I want my mommy,’ said Ruby-Mae, her eyes filling with tears.

‘Let’s go find her,’ I said, suddenly aware of the quietness of the park, and how far away the toilets were. What if something had happened to Lilith, something violent? We were in the middle of Joburg – it wouldn’t be the first time.

I called Amy, and took both girls by the hand. I put both my light bag and Lilith’s exceptionally heavy bag over my shoulder. As we walked towards the toilets, I saw the security guard lounging at his usual post on a bench. Relieved, I decided to go over and ask him for help. But I didn’t want to scare the girls.

‘My friend went to the toilet,’ I said him, trying to convey the urgency of what I was saying with my eyes. ‘Twenty minutes ago. Alone.’ I widened my eyes, glancing down at the girls to explain why I wasn’t saying more.

The security guard looked unworried. ‘The toilets are over there,’ he said with a tilt of his head.

‘I know where the toilets are,’ I said, a fake smile glued to my face. ‘I was thinking maybe you could go and check?’

‘Check?’

‘You know,’ I said. ‘In case ...’ I tried once again to role my eyes to communicate the full situation. Either my charade was useless, or the guard wasn’t interested in following. Instead, his eyes alighted on Amy, whose hand was beginning to squirm in mine.

‘Whose child is that?’ he asked, pointing at Amy. ‘Your friend?’

I probably should have cut the conversation short by agreeing, but I couldn’t deny my child. ‘No,’ I said. ‘She’s mine. This is my friend’s child.’ I lifted Ruby-Mae’s hand, still firmly in my own. ‘My friend who might be having trouble in the unguarded toilets.’

‘How come she’s black?’ he asked, still looking at Amy. I was glad to note that at this point Amy seemed mesmerised by something in the trees next to us.

I knew from past experience that black men found Amy’s existence as my child particularly interesting. I also knew how to deflect it. I glanced down to make sure Amy still wasn’t listening.

‘Her dad’s black,’ I said, offhandedly. It wasn’t entirely a lie.

The security guard perked up. ‘Way to go, sis-tah,’ he said, and gave me a complicated handshake. We were suddenly pals because of the assumed colour of an imaginary lover.

‘Mommy, I thirsty,’ Amy’s voice started up, the tree having lost its hold on her, while Ruby just looked stunned by this strange turn of events.

‘My friend,’ I tried again, hoping to cash in on my new friendship. ‘I’m worried about her.’ It was now at least half an hour since I’d seen Lilith. ‘Maybe I should call the police,’ I said, more to myself than the guard.

‘Why?’ said the guard, affronted.

‘Because my *friend* has been *gone* for half an *hour*,’ I said, trying not to sound frantic. ‘She went to the toilet and she hasn’t come back. For half an hour.’ My words weren’t making any real impression on the guard, but voicing them was making me even more nervous. I dropped Amy’s hand and pulled out my cellphone, and tried to remember what number one was actually supposed to dial for the police. 999? 911? Or was there some special number for my cellphone service provider? I couldn’t believe how unequipped I was for an emergency and was about to phone Sean when I remembered a number: 10111.

But I was pretty sure that if I phoned the police, they’d ask me if I’d checked the toilets, and I could hardly say that I was too scared to go in. So I put my phone away, grabbed Amy’s hand again, and turned our unwieldy chain around. ‘Come with me,’ I said to the security guard, who shrugged, disinterested, but strolled behind us, swinging his baton and whistling.

At the toilets, I didn’t know what to do. It could be dangerous, so I didn’t want to take the girls in with me. But I also didn’t want to leave them with the guard, who seemed to have a very underdeveloped sense of danger for a security guard.

‘Lilith!’ I called from the door. ‘Are you in there?’

Nothing. Silence.

‘You go in,’ I said to the guard.

‘It’s the woman’s toilets,’ he answered, leaning against the wall. ‘I might be misunderstood.’

I thought again about leaving the girls while I went in, but I just couldn’t do it. ‘Here,’ I suddenly said, inspired. I grabbed my purse and took out a fifty-rand note. ‘Maybe this will help you,’ I said, ‘if you’re misunderstood.’

The guard smiled and pocketed the note. ‘Sure, I’ll go look,’ he said, shrugging as if he’d never had any other intention.

The girls made to follow him in, but I quickly pulled them back. ‘We’re staying out here,’ I said as calmly as I could.

‘Why?’ said Amy.

‘Because,’ I said.

Apparently now that this was a paid job the security guard was prepared to participate enthusiastically, because I heard him calling out in the toilets and banging doors open and shut. He even went round to the men’s toilet.

‘Nothing,’ he said, coming out a few minutes later. ‘Totally empty.’

I didn’t know whether to be relieved that he hadn’t found Lilith’s beaten body, or more worried.

‘Okay,’ I said. ‘We’ll check again at the playground in case we somehow missed her, and then I’m phoning the police.’

The girls were looking at me with big eyes.

‘I want my mommy,’ said Ruby-Mae. ‘Where’s my mommy?’

‘Let’s go back to the slides,’ I said, trying to keep my voice calm.

The girls let go of my hands, and took each other’s hands instead. They ran ahead of me, Amy yelling, ‘Slides!’ and Ruby-Mae yelling, ‘Mommy!’ I followed, trying hard not to cry, my shoulder aching from Lilith’s heavy bag.

As we emerged from the line of trees that shield the toilet area from the jungle gyms, I scanned the area for Lilith’s distinctive blonde hair and slight frame. My body felt as if I’d been plunged into cold water. Where was she?

Something terrible must have happened to her.

Then something in Ruby-Mae’s voice changed, and she let go of Amy’s hand and ran off to the right.

To Lilith.

I have never, in my whole life, experienced such a sense of relief. I sank to the ground, put my hands over my face, and started crying. Crying doesn’t even describe it. Sobbing. I sobbed with relief.

Lilith ran towards me and crouched down. ‘What’s wrong?’ she said.

‘I couldn’t find you,’ I stuttered between sobs. ‘I thought something had happened to you.’

Lilith put her arms around me. ‘Sorry,’ she said. ‘I was a bit ...’ She paused, blushing. ‘A bit constipated,’ she admitted.

‘We checked the toilets,’ I said. ‘You weren’t there. I thought ...’ I couldn’t put into words what I’d thought, because I didn’t really know. ‘I thought something bad had happened to you.’

‘I went to check something in my car afterwards,’ said Lilith. ‘I wasn’t thinking. I’m so sorry.’

I looked at Lilith. She looked pale, and a bit like she might have been crying, but it could have been a reaction to my own tears.

‘Please never go to those toilets again,’ I said to her, completely unreasonably.

***

I felt traumatised by what had happened at the park, and I needed to talk to someone about it.

When Sean got home that night, he was withdrawn and I had to drag him from his computer to get him to sit down and eat some supper. Those days we ate at the table, after Amy was asleep. But Sean always leaves the television on, and he can see it from his chair, so he tends to watch over my shoulder. I tried to speak casually to him while we ate.

‘I had a strange experience today,’ I said.

‘Mmm.’

‘I lost Lilith in the park.’

‘Mmm.’

‘But it was fine because it turned out she’d been eaten by a dinosaur.’

‘That’s nice,’ said Sean.

‘Oh, just go and eat in the TV room if that’s how it’s going to be,’ I snapped. That one he heard, and took his plate to the couch.

It wasn’t late, so I phoned Rose.

‘Something weird happened at the park with Lilith today,’ I started.

‘I didn’t realise you went to the park today,’ said Rose.

‘I went with Lilith,’ I said. ‘And she kind of disappeared.’

‘I was stuck in the house with Maggie all day. I would have loved to go to the park.’

‘Sorry,’ I said, a bit distressed by how this was going. ‘I thought you had tennis.’

‘Tennis was yesterday,’ said Rose. ‘I only do tennis on Tuesdays. You know that.’

‘Rose, I’m sorry. I got it confused. I would have loved to have you there, especially when I lost Lilith.’

Finally, she let me tell the story. At the end I waited for her reaction.

‘So you found her?’ she said.

‘But that’s not the point,’ I said. ‘It was scary. And a bit strange.’

‘I really think you might be overreacting,’ said Rose. ‘Maybe it’s the hormones.’

I’d told Rose that the IVF cycle had started, but I hadn’t told Lilith. I wasn’t sure why, and I’d meant to tell her at the park, but with all the drama it hadn’t come up.

‘I guess so,’ I said. But I still didn’t feel better when I got off the phone. So I phoned Lerato.

Unlike Sean, Lerato let me talk, and unlike Rose, she didn’t take my visit to the park as a personal insult. If anything, she was too good an audience.

‘It sounds very strange,’ she said. ‘Because you checked the toilet and she wasn’t there.’

‘Exactly,’ I said.

‘And what would she be checking in her car? You said she had that bag full of jerseys with her, so surely anything she needed was in the bag?’

‘I don’t know,’ I said, suddenly getting a glimpse of what Lerato must be like on the few occasions her cases take her to court.

‘She never actually said what she was doing at the car,’ said Lerato.

‘No,’ I said. ‘And I didn’t really ask. I was too upset.’

‘You were upset because you knew something was off,’ said Lerato, in a voice that expected no argument.

‘Maybe it’s the hormones,’ I said, echoing Rose.

‘Do *you* think it’s the hormones?’ asked Lerato.

‘Not really.’

‘Then it’s not.’ Lerato paused. ‘These women are strange, Rebecca. I don’t trust them.’

I laughed. ‘You don’t trust anyone, Lerato.’

‘It’s a good policy, Rebecca. Mark my words. Mark. My. Words.’

I felt better because Lerato had taken me seriously, but by the next morning I had convinced myself that I was overreacting and that nothing particularly serious had happened. Anyway, all had ended well, so I put it out of my mind.

It was a few days later that Lilith phoned me.

‘I have a favour to ask you, Rebecca, but you can say no.’

‘Okay,’ I said.

‘I’ve been invited to this thing, but it’ll mean going away for Saturday night. Is there any chance you can have Ruby-Mae?’

‘For the whole night?’ I’d never had another child to stay for the night.

‘Yes.’ Lilith paused. ‘She’s really easy, Rebecca. And there’s no one else I really feel comfortable with.’

I had a lot of questions. Like, what exactly this ‘thing’ was that was so enticing that the usually obsessed Lilith would allow Ruby-Mae to be away from her all night? And what had happened to buxom Mrs Clarke? And could I actually cope with two children? It was the last question that decided me, because it worried me that I was scared of looking after two children while I was in the process of trying for a second child. So I didn’t ask any of my questions.

‘Sure,’ I said. ‘What time?’

***

The whole thing was both more difficult and easier than I had imagined. For a start, Sean seemed suspicious of the whole arrangement.

‘I just don’t understand why she wants to leave her here,’ he kept saying.

The more I explained that Lilith had very few people in her life, the more he protested that that wasn’t our problem, and the angrier I became. The reality was that I actually agreed with him, but it sounded so ugly and uncharitable. I managed to convince myself that looking after Ruby-Mae for a night would be a pleasure, and nothing less than the right thing to do. It’s quite lucky I was in that frame of mind when Lilith told me she wanted to leave Ruby-Mae with us not just for a night, but from nine on the Saturday morning until nine on the Sunday.

‘Sure,’ I said, feeling anything but. ‘No problem ... What is it you’re doing again?’

‘Team building,’ said Lilith with a loud sigh. ‘Out of town for the night. I’ve tried to convince them that I’m only half day so I don’t count. But they seem to think it’ll be fun for me.’

‘Maybe it will,’ I said.

‘As much as I feel confident leaving Ruby- Mae with you, Rebecca,’ said Lilith, ‘it’s still the first time I’ll be away from her for so long. I’m going to miss her so much. I wish I didn’t have to do this.’ She sounded almost desperate, her distress about leaving Ruby-Mae genuine.

‘I’ll text you all night,’ I said quickly. ‘You won’t have a minute’s worry. You might even have fun.’ I gently elbowed her.

Lilith took my hand and squeezed it. I wasn’t sure, but I thought I saw a tear in her eye.

‘You know,’ she said, ‘you’re a great friend.’

On the day of the Big Sleepover, my strategy was to keep the girls busy all day, and out of Sean’s hair so that he didn’t feel put upon. But I was irritated that Sean was so resentful and uninvolved. It made me even more determined to everything right.

Ruby-Mae and Lilith arrived promptly at nine, with an enormous bag of clothes.

‘I’m sorry,’ said Lilith. ‘She made me pack half her wardrobe. And a whole lot of toys. You’d think she was moving in with you.’ Lilith’s voice broke, and I remembered how hard this was for her.

‘Well, you and I both know she’s not,’ I said, patting Lilith’s arm. ‘You’re going to have fun, and I’m going to make sure these girls have fun, and you’ll see her tomorrow first thing.’

Lilith took so long saying goodbye to Ruby-Mae that I wondered if she was ever going to leave. I tried to imagine leaving Amy for a night, but I knew that it would be different for me, because I’d leave her with my mother, or Carl, or even Susan. Family. Eventually Lilith delivered a final kiss, and walked to her car.

‘I’ll keep you posted,’ I called after her.

She managed a smile. ‘Thanks,’ she said. ‘I owe you.’

We set off to the zoo first, and the girls were delighted. Ruby-Mae was easy, engaged and interested in everything she saw. If anything, Amy gave me a harder time, becoming whiny when she thought Ruby-Mae was getting too much of my attention, and at one point sitting down near the elephant enclosure, refusing to move and demanding an ice cream. Being a Saturday, the zoo was fairly crowded, and I suddenly became obsessed by the thought that people looking at us would think Ruby-Mae was my child, and not Amy. I thought of the eggs I was growing in my body thanks to the IVF hormones, and wondered yet again if I had even an inkling of what I was doing.

In the afternoon we went to Rose’s house for a playdate. Rose was put out that Lilith hadn’t asked her to look after Ruby-Mae.

‘It’s like she likes you better,’ she said, her voice almost whiny, and her face confused.

I was slightly offended that Rose found this such an inexplicable state of affairs, but instead of challenging her, I commented that I lived slightly closer to Lilith and maybe that was the reason.

‘Or maybe you just happened to be at the park on the day she needed to ask,’ said Rose, looking happier.

I nodded, deciding it was better not to mention that Lilith had actually phoned me. ‘Probably,’ I said.

And it was fun seeing Rose – we’d perhaps had too many playdates with Lilith, and it had been a while since it was just Rose and me. She seemed mollified when I voiced this, and made a lovely tea party for the girls in the garden.

My plan had been to take the girls for an early supper at Spur without Sean, but he phoned while I was at Rose.

‘I’m missing Amy,’ he said. ‘And I’d better get to know this Ruby-Mae, seeing as we’re apparently her closest relatives.’ But he said it in a kind way, and we arranged to meet at the Spur after I’d left Rose. I thought about inviting Rose and Aidan to join us, but decided it would be more fun just Sean and me and the girls.

I expected that, when we got there, the girls would spend most of their time in the play area, and that Sean and I would have some time to catch up. Amy would happily have gone with that plan, but from the moment Ruby-Mae saw Sean, she was a child in love. She’d met Sean before, but always in passing. He’d arrived at Spur before us, so I herded the two excited girls into the restaurant towards the table where he was sitting, feeling slightly annoyed that he hadn’t bagged one closer to the play area – always my first concern.

Ruby-Mae stopped next to the table.

‘Amy’s daddy,’ she announced.

‘My daddy,’ agreed Amy.

‘But you can call me Sean,’ Sean said with a smile to Ruby-Mae.

‘Amy say Daddy,’ said Ruby-Mae, who’d never made any attempt at prolonged conversation with me.

‘That’s because I *am* her daddy,’ said Sean. ‘But for you, I’m Sean.’

‘*My* Sean,’ said Ruby-Mae.

‘Sure,’ Sean said, with a look of slight panic.

I laughed as I slid into the banquette across from him. ‘That’s weird. I thought you were *my* Sean.’

Ruby-Mae quickly climbed up and sat next to him so that their thighs were flush.

‘Sorry, Rebecca,’ he said, glancing down at her blonde head. ‘Looks like you’ve got competition.’

I took a photo of the two of them on my phone, and sent it to Lilith, as I’d been doing all day.

‘You don’t think she’ll worry about a strange man with her daughter?’ Sean asked. His voice was light, but I knew he was serious. When Sean was eighteen, he’d been accused of sexually molesting an eleven-year-old cousin. It had turned out that the perpetrator was in fact a different cousin, on the other side of the child’s family, and that there’d been a miscommunication. However, from what I can gather, the experience had changed Sean. He’s always very careful with other people’s children, and even with women he doesn’t know. I think that might actually be why I had to approach him that first night, at my show.

‘You’re hardly a strange man,’ I said. ‘And if she was worried about you, she wouldn’t have sent Ruby-Mae to us for the night.’

And maybe that was why she preferred us to Rose. I didn’t know Rose’s husband well, but Lilith had once commented that there seemed to be something ‘off’ about him. I’d laughed, but after that I couldn’t help looking at him slightly warily. Lilith certainly seemed to prefer Sean to Aidan. Of course, I couldn’t tell any of this to Sean in front of Ruby-Mae and Amy, who’d climbed onto the bench next to me and was colouring in the obligatory children’s activity page with her little tongue protruding from between her teeth.

‘Why don’t you girls go play while we order the food?’ I asked, having ascertained what they wanted to eat.

But Ruby-Mae was having none of it. ‘I with my Sean,’ she said matter-of-factly. And indeed that was where she stayed all through the meal, asking his opinion on everything from Barbie to dinosaurs, and laughing at almost everything he said. She obviously missed having a father figure in her life, and I resolved to make a bit of an effort to set Lilith up with some nice single men who might make Ruby-Mae a good father.

The girls fell asleep in the car, and when we got home we decided not to bath them, and gently slipped on their nappies and pyjamas, Sean insisting that I change Ruby-Mae while he did Amy. We tucked them up together in the double bed in Amy’s room, and we each, without needing to say anything, kissed both the sleeping forms good night.

‘She’s a sweet child,’ Sean said later, when we were standing side by side at the basin brushing our teeth.

‘She certainly loves you,’ I said, nudging him with my elbow.

‘Maybe it’s something to do with adoption,’ Sean said, his voice serious. ‘Maybe she instinctively picks up that we’re open to loving children.’

‘Isn’t everybody open to loving children?’ I asked.

‘I don’t know about everybody,’ said Sean. ‘I only know about me.’

It was an obvious thing to say, but I found that deeply profound, and I reached over and kissed him. ‘You’re a really great man,’ I said.

He didn’t respond, but I could see that he was pleased.

Later in the night, when Ruby-Mae cried out for Lilith, it wasn’t me who comforted her, it was Sean. He rocked her back to sleep, and stayed sitting next to the bed for a long time after that.

