---
title: Good mothers don’t give up.
---

# Good mothers don’t give up.
 {:.page-break-after.letter}

The Tuesday after Ruby-Mae stayed over, we did the egg aspiration and fertilisation part of the IVF. I’d forgotten the stress of worrying about how many eggs I would actually make, and how many embryos would result. Sean was morose about having to produce a semen sample on demand, and I snapped at him that the whole thing was his idea, and he should try having swollen ovaries all month, and being knocked out. I reminded him, graphically, about how those eggs would be removed (with a needle, through the wall of my vagina).

‘Fun it is not,’ I spat at him. ‘So in the big picture, I think you can count yourself lucky.’

He stopped complaining after that, because I think he understood that he did have the easiest part of the deal. But at the same time, I knew there was something passive about my role, whereas he actually had to perform on the day, or else the whole thing would be a waste. I tried to be nicer to him on the way to the clinic.

As it turned out, from the ten follicles, or potential eggs that I had grown, we harvested eight.

‘Excellent,’ said Dr Stevenson afterwards. ‘And Sean, your sperm tested well this morning, so I think we’re going to get some viable embryos from this.’

‘Getting viable embryos was never our problem,’ I reminded Dr Stevenson. ‘It’s making them stay in my body that’s the bitch.’

Dr Stevenson looked a bit taken aback, but I smiled to show I meant no harm.

‘I think that what Rebecca’s trying to say,’ said Sean, ‘is that we aren’t going to get our hopes up too soon.’

‘Won’t count our chickens before they hatch, so to speak,’ I said with a laugh.

Sean laughed too. ‘Exactly.’

Dr Stevenson shifted in his seat. He’d never quite got our sense of humour.

That evening, the lab phoned to let us know that three of the eggs had fertilised and we had three embryos. Sean and I then had the debate we’d had every time in the past – how many to put back. On the one hand, you want to have the best chance of having a baby. On the other, we didn’t want triplets. I was also never really convinced that putting three back didn’t actually lessen the chance of one attaching.

‘But we’ve tried all the permutations,’ argued Sean, who wanted to put all three back. ‘It’s not like the pregnancy took when we only put one back.’

I couldn’t argue, except to wonder why we were doing this at all if we were going on past experience.

‘If this is the last time we’re going to try,’ said Sean, ‘then I want us to try everything. Let’s put all three back.’

‘And if we have triplets?’ I asked.

‘Then we’ll manage,’ he said. ‘I can think of worse curses than having four children.’

I wasn’t so sure, but I didn’t feel that I could say so to Sean. I thought four children was two children too many, but just thinking that thought made me feel non-maternal. So I agreed, and three days later Dr Stevenson put all three embryos back into my uterus, and we began our wait.

The first time we’d done IVF, all those years ago, Sean had been absolutely convinced it would work. He’d gone out the next day and had started buying baby supplies ‘just to get on top of it,’ he’d said. I kept reminding him that there was no guarantee, but he’d just explain his theory that the large majority of people actually do get pregnant on their first try of IVF, but that the doctors have to downplay it because of the cases where it doesn’t work. Of course, I’d done a lot more reading about it than he had. I’d read all the stories in the chat rooms of heartbroken potential mothers who still weren’t pregnant after seventeen tries. I tried to manage his expectations, and he refused to listen.

When I didn’t fall pregnant that time, he blamed my negative attitude. He said that a uterus had to be a warm and receiving place to accept a baby, and that I’d made mine hard and unwelcoming. I knew that was crap – look at all the completely unwanted babies whose mother’s uteruses had nonetheless carried them – but it hurt. I lashed back, and blamed him for buying all the baby stuff. I loaded it all into my car and drove around Joburg giving things to startled-looking beggars. Sean told me I was insane, but he never bought baby things again – to such an obsessive degree, in fact, that I could barely get him to buy anything for Amy until she was actually in the house.

This time he said, ‘I want to buy a teddy bear.’

I raised my eyebrows.

‘I think it will make the baby feel welcome, without actually jinxing it.’

He looked so serious that I didn’t have the heart to point out how absolutely little sense his thinking made. Instead I said, ‘You’d better buy three. Don’t want to spark off sibling rivalry in utero.’

‘Good point,’ said Sean, making me worry slightly for his sanity.

He bought three teddy bears, which Amy immediately annexed for herself.

‘Well,’ I said, ‘at least we’ll keep them either way this time.’

Lerato was, as always, fascinated by the process. She didn’t approve of the whole business of having children in general, and had even had a sticker on her car for a while saying ‘Childfree by Choice’. She took it off when I started struggling with fertility issues though.

‘I realise it might be offensive to people who are childfree *not* by choice,’ she explained. I told her that I wasn’t offended, that I still respected her choice, but she’d already convinced herself that it was unacceptable. ‘And anyway,’ she said. ‘It upsets my mom.’

Despite her childfree stance, she seemed to like the idea of fertility treatment.

‘It’s empowering that we can take control of our reproduction,’ she said.

‘It is many things,’ I told her, more than once, ‘but empowering is not one of them. Especially when it doesn’t work.’

‘No, no,’ she assured me. ‘It is. You have laughed in the face of fate. You have revolted against the random throw of the dice. You have taken control of your destiny.’

I’ve learnt not to argue with Lerato when she gets like this. I imagine her colleagues sighing and tossing their papers in the air when she adopts this tone in court. (‘I don’t actually go to court all that often,’ she reminds me.)

This time, she seemed particularly fixated on race.

‘I think this IVF story is a white thing,’ she said. ‘My mother says blacks don’t do this.’ Lerato’s mother, who spent the bulk of her adulthood in exile, is Lerato’s oracle on South African racial norms.

‘Well then come along to the clinic with me one morning, and count how many black couples are waiting.’

Lerato paused to digest this. ‘Those must be the gays,’ she announced.

I sighed. ‘No, Lerato. There are some gay couples, both black and white. But there are also straight black people doing fertility treatment.’ I actually hadn’t personally spotted any gay black couples, but that didn’t mean they weren’t there. And maybe some of the women I thought were mother and daughter were actually gay. Lerato did this to me – got me so fired up about an issue that I lost track of my argument and fluffed the facts. But there were plenty of straight black couples at the clinic, so my point was still valid. ‘Do you think black people don’t suffer from infertility?’ I asked. ‘Are you assuming your own eggs are just fabulous?’

Lerato ignored both my tone and my dipstick racial research.

‘Would you like one of my eggs?’ she asked, her eyes lighting up. ‘That’s a great idea. I could give you an egg, and you could have an Amy-coloured child. And with my genes, it would be very clever.’

‘Your genes frighten the living daylights out of me, Lerato,’ I said. And then gave her a hug, because I knew that she actually meant it, and it was the most generous thing anyone had ever said to me. ‘For now, we’ll stick with my eggs. But thank you. I love you.’

‘It’s nothing.’ Lerato shrugged, but I could tell she was pleased by my gratitude.

I didn’t tell any of my other old friends about the IVF – they’d watched me fail too many times. This time, I wanted to fail on my own. And I suppose that I was also still nervous about what this process said about Amy and my feelings about adopting. Although I knew intellectually that nothing could change my love for Amy, trying for a biological child still felt like a betrayal.

But I did tell Rose and Lilith. I spent so much time with them, and they’d been part of that initial decision to go ahead with it.

Lilith was very interested. She made me take her through the whole process, and discuss the various possible outcomes of each stage. She even went and did some research of her own, and sent me links to interesting articles and chat rooms – nothing I didn’t already know, but I appreciated the gesture. She phoned or sent a text daily, asking me how I was feeling and if I needed any help. I was very tired, which Lilith took as an excellent sign, so I let her come over a few times and entertain the girls while I rested. I knew it was the hormones making me tired, but when Lilith got excited I couldn’t help feeling a faint stirring of hope.

Rose, on the other hand, was uninterested. I don’t know if it was fair to compare her to Lerato, who loves me like a sister, and Lilith, who was a bit unnaturally interested. Maybe Rose’s reaction was actually the norm, and holding it against her was unfair. But I did feel a bit put out that the woman I thought of as my warmest friend never asked how I was, and changed the subject after a few minutes if Lilith got going.

When I mentioned it to Lerato, she showed an unusual empathy with Rose. ‘Do you know why she only has one child?’

‘Because Maggie is only three?’ I said, but the point was well made. I, of all people, should know better than to make assumptions about people’s fertility and situations.

‘Did I tell you I met her husband?’ asked Lerato.

‘Whose husband?’

‘Your friend Rose,’ said Lerato. ‘His company is entering a contract with one of my clients. We were at a meeting together.’

‘How on earth did you know it was him?’

‘I recognised his surname.’

This is why Lerato is as successful as she is: she absorbs information. I had to think for several seconds before I could remember Rose’s surname myself.

‘MacFarlane,’ I finally said.

Lerato looked at me strangely. ‘Yes, I know.’

I didn’t have the energy to point out that I’d been reminding myself, not her.

‘So, what did you think?’ I asked instead.

‘Very good-looking,’ she said. ‘Ve-ry.’

I’d only met Aidan MacFarlane in passing, but good-looking was not the first thing that came to mind when I thought of him. I probably would have been more likely to describe him as ‘inoffensive’. But Lerato and I had never had the same taste in men.

I laughed. ‘If you say so,’ I said.

‘But I think he’s one of *those*,’ she said, matter-of-factly.

Lerato’s world is full of ‘us’ and ‘them’ divisions. When she says someone is one of ‘those’, it could mean anything. I sighed.

‘One of what, Lerato?’

‘You know,’ she said, as if I was a particularly obtuse junior in her office. ‘One of those white men who only like black women.’

Lerato has a whole theory about men, dating and race. She mostly dates white men, although not exclusively, and she reckons this makes her an expert. She’s okay with black men who only date black women, and white men who only date white women, because she says there’s nothing wrong with being comfortable with what you know. ‘If I knew what I know,’ she says cryptically, ‘then maybe I’d also stick with that.’ She also likes men of whatever colour who date both black and white women. ‘Nothing wrong with being open to possibilities,’ she says, contradicting herself.

But she has something about white men who only date black women. ‘Every time a white man has told me that,’ she says, ‘the relationship has ended badly. They have strange, strange ideas, those men.’

‘What about black men who date only white women?’ I asked her the first time I heard her theory.

‘I have no experience with that,’ she answered seriously. ‘But they’re probably also crazy.’

So when Lerato said that Rose’s husband was one of ‘those’ men, I pointed out that she’d missed a small detail. ‘Rose is white, so he can’t be one of ‘those’ men,’ I said, making quote marks the air.

‘Yes,’ said Lerato, ‘that is strange. But I get a funny vibe from him. Like I get from those men.’

‘Did he make a move on you?’ I asked. This was getting interesting.

‘I’m not really sure,’ mused Lerato. ‘But maybe that’s got something to do with how weird Rose is.’ With that, Lerato was through with the subject of Aiden MacFarlane. At least for then.

I wouldn’t have agreed that Rose was weird, and I thought that on the whole, Lerato was talking nonsense, but I took her point about not knowing about Rose’s own fertility situation, so I decided to stop talking about it to Rose. I also made a mental note to stop Lerato passing on all this racial stuff to Amy, whose life would be complicated enough without Lerato’s brand of crazy.

And maybe Rose also realised she’d been a bit strange, because two days later she sent me a huge flower arrangement, with a card saying, ‘Thinking of you. So much love. Rose’.

Maybe I would have preferred to chat face to face, but this was Rose’s way of saying that she cared, even though this particular topic was off her radar. It is a fact that with friends – you have to take them for what they are. And for me, Rose had always been kind and supportive.

I took her flowers for what I thought they were.

