---
title: Good mothers don’t gossip.
---

# Good mothers don’t gossip.
 {:.page-break-after.letter}

Lilith brought up Rose’s flowers the next time we were at the park. Rose had bowed out at the last minute, and I was on day nine of the fourteen-day waiting period before I found out if I was pregnant

‘I believe Rose sent you flowers,’ said Lilith. She seemed more relaxed that day than she’d been for some time.

‘Did she tell you?’ I said. I don’t know why I found this surprising.

Lilith looked at me, taking her ever-vigilant gaze off Ruby-Mae for a moment. She sucked on her lips, and then said, ‘I don’t know how to say this without sounding bitchy, so maybe I shouldn’t say anything.’

I laughed. ‘Well, you can’t possibly leave it at that. Now I’m going to imagine something terrible.’

Lilith laughed too. ‘Okay,’ she said. ‘She told me yesterday at the park. She made a point of telling me. And she also made a point of dropping it into a conversation with a complete stranger we were chatting to yesterday. Not about the IVF, but that she has a friend who’s going through a tough time and that she’d sent flowers. Like she needed everyone to know how thoughtful she is.’ Lilith smiled. ‘Maybe I’m just jealous that I didn’t think of it.’

I touched Lilith’s arm. ‘You let me talk about it,’ I said. ‘That’s worth a lot of flowers.’

I was tempted to tell Lilith how strange I found Rose’s behaviour. Lilith was, after all, our only mutual friend. But with Lilith I still felt a sense of loyalty to Rose, who I was friends with first. Maybe it’s because I was working so hard at not talking about my feelings about Rose that I brought up the issue of Rose’s husband.

‘What do you think of Aiden?’ I said. We were sitting side by side on the grassy slope, watching the girls on the jungle gym. Something about this aspect made it easier to ask things that would usually seem awkward. I thought fleetingly of the way Lilith used to interview Rose and me in the early days.

Lilith pulled her cardigan around her shoulders before she answered. ‘He’s not my cup of tea,’ she said, after a pause so long that I thought she’d forgotten the question. ‘He’s ...’ She searched for a word but couldn’t seem to find the right one. ‘He’s just off,’ she eventually said. I remembered then that she’d actually said this about him before.

‘Lerato would agree,’ I said, but didn’t elaborate.

Lilith smiled. ‘I like Lerato,’ she said, as if bestowing a gift, which perhaps she was. Not a lot of people get Lerato. ‘She’s gutsy and loyal and clever,’ said Lilith. ‘I’d want her on my side if I needed help.’

I thought Lilith was done with the subject of Lerato, because she jumped up to run over to Ruby-Mae, who’d tripped on a piece of loose canvas at the bottom of the slide. I watched Amy leaning against Lilith, both of them looking carefully at Ruby-Mae’s knees. Ruby-Mae gradually stopped whimpering and took Amy’s hand. The two of them went and sat together on the grass near us, and Lilith returned to me.

‘The girls are so cute,’ I said. ‘The way they look out for each other. Like sisters.’ I rubbed my tummy before I could stop myself.

Lilith smiled at me, and bumped her shoulder against mine. But she wasn’t done with the topic of Lerato. ‘Lerato, I think, would always look out for you,’ said Lilith, as if this was a perfectly logical response. ‘Sometimes you need someone like that, with the things life throws at you. You can cope with curve balls, because you have people like Lerato and Sean. Bright people. Loyal people. Connected people.’

I didn’t really know how to respond. With anyone else I might have pointed out that they had good people too. But Lilith didn’t really have much of anyone, besides Rose, myself and Mrs Clarke.

‘How’s Mrs Clarke?’ I asked, then blushed, realising how transparent my train of thought was. Before I could apologise, Lilith answered.

‘Eugenie is like an angel here on earth,’ she said. ‘I know it seems unlikely, what with the sex shop and everything. But she is.’ Lilith scratched absent-mindedly at an ant that had crawled onto her ankle. ‘The problem with Eugenie is her health. You just can’t count on a person with that many health problems. And I should know.’

Once again, I found myself at a loss for words, but Lilith seemed a bit manic that day, and simply carried on.

‘Who have you left Amy to in your will?’ she asked. ‘Who gets them if you die?’

I looked at her. ‘That’s quite a personal question.’ I wasn’t really sure why I found it uncomfortable, but I did find myself a bit taken aback by her use of ‘them’. How could she be so sure my IVF would work?

‘Is it?’ she said. I expected her to quickly change the subject, but she just looked at me.

‘Carl, my brother, or Sean’s sister, Susan. Depending who’s more able to take her. We’d trust either of them.’

‘Options,’ said Lilith, as if I’d proved some sort of point. ‘It’s all about options.’

I was trying to formulate some sort of response – maybe even take the bull by the horns and ask her if she felt that she had no options. But it seemed, again, that she wasn’t done.

‘That’s what I like about you,’ said Lilith. ‘You are a person with options and plans and support.’

I laughed. ‘*That’s* what you like about me?’

Lilith laughed too. ‘Oh dear, that sounded terrible.’ She patted my arm, a tentative butterfly of a touch. ‘I actually like so many things about you, Rebecca. I hope that you’ll always be a big part of Ruby-Mae’s life.’

Did I find our conversation strange, that day? Did I find it ominous in any way? I don’t think I did.

