---

---

After that first visit from Lilith, something shifted in our group dynamic. Lilith felt like more a part of the group with Rose and me, and certainly from my point of view, she felt closer. I told Rose about Sean and the IVF, mostly because I felt a bit disloyal having shared this secret fear with Lilith only. Rose agreed with Lilith, and with the two of them urging me on, I told Sean that we could try another round of fertility treatment. Sean was so happy that for a moment I doubted my own wisdom: his very happiness felt like a betrayal of all we’d gone through to get Amy. But I bit my lip and made an appointment with the fertility gynae.

And then Lilith suggested that the three of us go for lunch.

‘Here’s my plan,’ she said one day at the park. ‘You guys bring your girls to my place, and we’ll leave them with Mrs Clarke, who often minds Ruby-Mae. She lives next door. And we’ll go up the road to Hyde Park for a quick lunch.’ Lilith looked at us, her blue eyes wide. ‘Please say yes. It’s been ages since I had a girls’ lunch. And I can enjoy it if I know that Ruby-Mae has friends with her.’

The lunch itself was no problem, but I must say the idea of leaving Amy with the unknown Mrs Clarke instead of Gugu freaked me out. I knew that Rose felt the same way. Thinking that I’d just make an excuse on the day, I cautiously agreed.

Lilith was delighted, and smiling wide she called to Ruby: ‘Ruby-Mae, Amy and Maggie are coming to play at our house.’

Ruby smiled, a mirror of her mother.

\*

On the day of the lunch date I fully intended cancelling the child care arrangements.

I’d decided that I’d pretend that Amy was sick, and therefore better at home with Gugu. I’d chatted to Rose, and she was going to use a visit from her mother as her excuse. I felt terrible – and terrible that little Ruby would be disappointed – but we really weren’t comfortable with the unknown Mrs Clarke, as much as Rose and I tried to convince each other that we were. I had even, feeling like I was totally transparent, planted the seed of my white lie the day before at the park: I mentioned to Lilith that I thought Amy was getting sniffly.

Gugu comes to work at 8am. She’s never late. So when she hadn’t come to work at eight-thirty on the day of the lunch date, I knew something was wrong.

I phoned her, to discover that she wasn’t feeling well, and intended going to the clinic. I was tempted to ask at what stage she’d actually planned on letting me know, but I bit my tongue. I know from experience that Gugu does not consider it her job to let me know when she is ill, but rather my job to ask, no matter how many times I tell her differently. I once even got Lerato to explain it all in Zulu, and Gugu nodded happily and said that yes, she could quite see. She still doesn’t phone though.

And so I had no child care on the one day – the *one* day – that I was counting on it. I phoned my mom in a state.

‘You have to look after Amy,’ I said.

‘I’d love to,’ said Mom. ‘When?’

‘Lunch today.’

My mother was silent. Then she said, ‘I have a pedicure.’

Now, when I was growing up, I don’t think my mother knew a pedicure from a peppercorn. Then my parents went away for a weekend a few years ago, and Mom had her first pedicure. She now has pedicures at least every two weeks. And they are sacred.

‘Surely you can reschedule?’ I said. ‘I’m desperate.’

‘Why?’ Mom sounded cautious.

I told her the story, a part of me already knowing what I was going to hear.

‘Mrs Clarke sounds lovely,’ said Mom. ‘I don’t know understand the problem.’

Given that I had described her as ‘an unknown quantity who is probably a paedophile’, my mom wasn’t exactly being rational. But I also know when I am beaten.

It was Mrs Clarke or Sean’s mom, and surely anyone was better than Angela Prince.

\*\*\*

When I arrived at the address Lilith had given me, I immediately had misgivings.

Her block of flats was particularly decrepit, with a row of shops underneath. There was an empty Italian restaurant, a cake shop and a laundry. But they were all dwarfed by the giant flashing neon sign saying: ‘Sexstuff. Adult shop.’ I’d driven past it a hundred times, wondering what sort of people lived in the flats above it.

Now I knew: Lilith. And Mrs Clarke.

I was considering just reversing out the small parking lot when Lilith stepped out of one of the first floor flats, and waved over the balcony, smiling.

I had no idea how I was going to leave Amy in a building with a sex shop. I knew rationally that the shop had nothing to do with Lilith, but the idea of Amy being anywhere near seedy types looking for porn on a weekday afternoon really bothered me. And for some reason, porn on a Tuesday afternoon seemed even less acceptable than, say, porn on a Saturday night. I was quite sure that the people in the shop at that very moment were a particularly pervy brand of perverts.

Still, Lilith looked so excited, so I smiled, and bundled Amy out of the car.

‘Look, Mommy, lights!’ Amy commanded happily, looking at the neon sign.

‘I’m so glad you made it,’ said Lilith as Amy and I reached the top of the stairs. ‘When you said Amy was feeling sick, I was worried you might cancel.’

I swear, until that moment, it had not crossed my mind that I could have just cancelled the whole lunch. I’d been so focused on Mrs Clarke and Amy that I somehow hadn’t seen that if I’d cancelled, the whole problem would have gone away. I was so angry with myself. But it was too late.

I smiled weakly at Lilith. ‘No,’ I said. ‘She rallied. We’re here.’

Lilith led me into the flat. ‘Well,’ she said. ‘Here it is. Home sweet home.’

I knew that my reaction mattered, and I looked around. The building was an old one, so the proportions of the flat were actually quite large and pleasing. The walls were painted in muted pastels, and Lilith had covered the somewhat ugly carpet with cheap, bright rugs. The walls were hung with posters and photos and some of Ruby’s art, which was displayed in supermarket picture frames.

‘It’s lovely,’ I said to Lilith. ‘You’ve really made it lovely.’

Lilith smiled. ‘Thank you,’ she said, squeezing my arm. ‘Home on a shoestring.’ She laughed, but it sounded a bit empty.

Just then, an enormous woman walked in through the flat’s open door. Her flesh billowed over a low-cut neckline, and her face was flushed with exertion. Her hair was bottle blonde, and held up with a scrunchy, and she actually had to turn her bulk sideways to get in the door.

No.

Lilith smiled. ‘Rebecca, this is Mrs Clarke.’

Yes.

Mrs Clarke smiled, revealing a smear of lipstick across her front teeth. ‘Nice to meet you,’ she said, her voice unexpectedly musical.

‘You too,’ I responded automatically, trying to take in her sheer bulk. Apparently my response was not enough, because nobody said anything. ‘So,’ I said, scraping my mind for social niceties. ‘So, you live in one of the flats?’

‘Next door,’ said Mrs Clarke. ‘Convenient for my shop.’

‘Mrs Clarke owns one of the shops downstairs,’ said Lilith, her voice light but her eyes fixed on mine.

I didn’t really have to ask, but at this point I tried to change reality.

‘The cake shop?’ I said hopefully, only realising as I said it that this might imply that I thought that she was fat. Which I did. Because she was.

Mrs Clarke laughed, her vast breasts quivering. ‘No. The sex shop.’

Lilith was still looking at me.

‘Ah,’ I said. ‘How ... nice.’

Just then, Amy tugged urgently at my hand. ‘Mommy,’ she said, ‘Mommy.’

‘Yes, love.’ I bent down, hoping to hide my confusion.

‘What’s a set shop?’

For a moment there was silence, and then both Mrs Clarke and I started laughing. Mrs Clarke left it for me to answer, and I liked that.

‘It’s a grown-up shop, sweetie,’ I said. ‘Very boring.’

‘Extremely boring,’ said Mrs Clarke, sounding as if she meant it. ‘Which is why I’m so happy to have three little girls to play with today. And where is my Ruby Ruby?’ she called, raising her voice.

To the right of the kitchen area was a passage, and Ruby came barrelling out. ‘Clarkie!’ she yelled. Then stopped and took in the scene. ‘Amy?’ She looked at her mom, a grin filling her pale face.

Lilith smiled at her daughter. ‘I told you, sweetie.’

Ruby seemed overcome with emotion. She sat down on the floor next to Lilith, as if unable to stand in the face of such bounty. And right then I was so glad that I hadn’t made an excuse, or cancelled.

I leant down to Ruby. ‘Amy’s been so excited to come, Ruby,’ I said. ‘She’s been so looking forward to seeing you and your house.’

I straightened, and looked at Lilith, who was about to speak when her cellphone, which she’d been holding, beeped. She glanced at it, frowning slightly.

‘It’s Rose,’ she said, reading a text. ‘She says she’ll meet us at the restaurant. Apparently her mom’s turned up out of the blue, so she’s leaving Maggie with her.’

I smiled and nodded, hoping it wasn’t obvious that I already knew about this plan. I nodded to Ruby, who was still sitting on the floor and smiling.

‘Just as well,’ I said. ‘If Maggie had arrived too, Ruby-Mae would probably have been too overcome to speak.’

We agreed to take my car, and we both said goodbye to our daughters – big hugs and kisses – and then to each other’s daughters – more hugs and kisses – and then to Mrs Clarke, who thankfully didn’t expect hugs and kisses.

‘Thanks, Eugenie,’ Lilith said to Mrs Clark as we left. ‘I really appreciate this.’

‘It’s nothing,’ said Eugenie Clark, sex-shop owner. ‘You deserve a break. Have a good lunch, girls.’

Lilith and I made small talk as we drove the short distance. I parked, squeezing in my car between a Land Rover and a pillar, and was about to open my door when Lilith reached for my arm. ‘Thank you,’ she said.

‘For what?’ I asked, genuinely confused.

‘For not judging Mrs Clarke. For bringing Amy to my flat. For trusting my judgment.’

I smiled. ‘I know you’re a great mom, Lilith,’ I said. ‘If you trust Mrs Clarke with Ruby-Mae, then I know Amy will be safe with her too.’ Having said this, I realised the truth of my words, and wondered why I had ever worried. Then I laughed. ‘Although maybe you should have warned me about her shop!’

