---
title: Schooling
---

# Schooling
{:.page-break-after}

The first person I told about the new school was Lilith, simply because we saw each other at the park that afternoon

‘You know,’ she said, after I’d told her about my experiences, and she’d laughed at all the right parts, ‘I’m not that crazy about Ruby-Mae’s crèche any more. The staff have changed, and I just don’t have that good feeling.’

This was the first I’d heard of it, but it seemed plausible. I’d feel very let down if I’d carefully chosen a school and then the staff changed.

‘Maybe I should look at your school,’ said Lilith. ‘See if they have more places.’

I wasn’t sure if she was asking me if she could or telling me that she would, but either way, my first reaction was how fabulous that would be – Amy and Ruby-Mae together. It would make Amy’s transition so much easier to already have a friend. I told Lilith about the twins who’d emigrated, and made her phone the school immediately, while I was sitting there.

I listened as Lilith explained to Trish that she was a friend of mine, and that she was interested in the other place at the school. She listened to something that Trish said.

‘I don’t really need to look,’ said Lilith to Trish. ‘If Rebecca is happy, I’ll be happy.’ But Trish must have insisted, because Lilith set up a time to go the next morning.

‘Will you start at the same time as us?’ I asked when she got off the phone. ‘If you like it.’

Lilith frowned slightly. ‘I’ll lose this term’s fees at the crèche,’ she said. ‘But if it means Ruby-Mae is happier, then it’s worth it.’

‘It’ll be such fun,’ I said. ‘And they’ll have each other.’ I’d become a bit obsessed with the idea that Ruby-Mae must start with Amy, and almost offered to pay for the first term, but I stopped myself. I didn’t want to offend Lilith.

‘Yes,’ said Lilith. ‘They’ll have each other. That’ll be great.’

I’m not sure if we had the thought at the same time, but Lilith said it as I thought it: ‘Rose is not going to love this.’

I laughed, but it was so true that it made me uncomfortable. ‘She’s had Maggie down for a school near her house since the beginning of time,’ I said. ‘She’s always going on about it, and about how you have to be down on the list from birth. She can hardly get upset with us.’

‘True,’ said Lilith, but without conviction.

I looked across the park and saw a familiar figure. ‘Well,’ I said, ‘I guess we’ll soon find out.’

Rose came straight up to us, and Maggie ran off to join Amy and Lilith. ‘Am I interrupting?’ she said, standing above us. She was smiling, but the words had a bite.

‘Of course not,’ said Lilith.

‘We ran into each other by chance,’ I said, then hated myself for making excuses, no matter how true. ‘And now you’re here, so it’s perfect.’

Rose obviously decided to accept this at face value.

‘I could not take another minute in the house with her,’ sighed Rose, indicating towards Maggie with her head and sitting down next to me, on the other side from Lilith. ‘I can’t wait for her to start school.’

‘Funny you should say that,’ I said. ‘We were just chatting and discovered that by pure coincidence we’ve been looking at the same nursery school for Amy and Ruby-Mae.’ I had no idea if Lilith would play along – we’d never been in a situation like this before. For all I knew, she was one of those people obsessed with the truth at all costs.

Lilith smiled and turned to Rose. She seemed to move slowly, but that was probably my guilty conscience; I’ve never been a good liar.

‘Isn’t it an extraordinary coincidence?’ Lilith said to Rose.

‘Oh, that’s nice,’ said Rose, and I felt a tension I hadn’t realised was there leave my shoulders. ‘What school?’

We told her, and she spent the next fifteen minutes telling us all about why the school she’d chosen was better, but that we’d never get in at such a late date, but that she was sure our school would be very nice. Rose, I was starting to realise, paid a lot of lip service to non-competitive mothering, but had areas where she was as bad as the next person. I gave an internal shrug, supposing that we all have our issues.

Rose ended her monologue with the statement, ‘Well, I’m sure it’ll be fine for your girls,’ with just the slightest emphasis on the word ‘your’. I noticed it, but was feeling so relieved that Rose wasn’t angry about that same-school thing that I didn’t react. But the usually relaxed Lilith took her up on it.

‘What do you mean, *our* girls?’

‘I don’t mean anything,’ said Rose. ‘I’m sure it’ll be nice.’

I expected Lilith to drop it, but she didn’t. ‘But not nice enough for Maggie?’ she hit back.

‘I never said that,’ said Rose. Which was true, but it had been the implication.

I was sitting between the two of them, and didn’t want this to continue.

‘We all choose what we feel is right for our girls,’ I said, in an unnecessarily loud voice. ‘And sometimes those things are going to be different.’

Rose took a moment, and then seemed to pull herself together. ‘I’m sorry if it came out wrong,’ she said, leaning across me and touching Lilith’s arm. ‘I really didn’t mean anything by it.’

Lilith took a deep breath. ‘Okay,’ she said, and then paused. ‘I get a bit defensive, I guess. It’s tough making decisions as a single mom.’

‘Oh shit,’ I said. ‘I haven’t asked Sean what *he* thinks about the school. I’d better find a way to make him think he chose it.’

We all dissolved in laughter, and the awkward moment passed. But when I thought about it that evening, I did wonder what Rose had meant, and whether she saw Maggie as somehow better than Amy and Ruby-Mae. Was the adopted brown child and the single mom’s daughter deserving of less, in Rose’s eyes?

I couldn’t talk to Rose about it, obviously, and I didn’t want to get Lilith riled up again, so when Amy was asleep I phoned Lerato and asked what she thought.

Lerato sighed dramatically as I finished the story. ‘So it’s started?’ she said.

‘What’s started?’

‘The part where you second guess all your decisions and interrogate every remark that everyone makes, all in the name of motherhood?’

I was hurt. ‘I’m not like that, Lerato.’

‘Well,’ she said, ‘your mommy friends are making you like that. I haven’t heard you unpack the nuances of somebody’s statement like this since Josephine Catskill said you had big boobs in standard nine.’

‘She meant it as an insult,’ I said on reflex.

‘She meant it as a compliment,’ said Lerato, sounding deliberately bored, and we both laughed.

‘So Rose meant this as a compliment?’ I said.

‘Jesus, I doubt it,’ said Lerato. ‘I don’t like or trust that woman. But that’s not my point.’

I waited, but she wanted me to beg.

‘What is your point?’

‘That it’s all completely and totally irrelevant and ever so slightly boring. If you’re happy about this school, and happy about this other little one going, then who cares what Queen Rose of the flowing robes thinks?’

‘Shouldn’t I be happy about Ruby-Mae going?’

‘What am I?’ said Lerato. ‘God?’

‘You just sounded like I shouldn’t be happy about it.’

‘So now we’re unpacking my statements as well.’ Lerato laughed. ‘Okay. I’ve decided that I actually like that Lilith chick, and the kid seems fine. I just think it’s a bit odd that suddenly she wants to change schools to be with you. A bit stalkery.’

‘Lilith’s not stalkery,’ I said, but I sounded uncertain even to my own ears.

‘She is a bit,’ said Lerato. ‘Her boundaries are a bit strange. But, as I’ve said, I like her.’ Lerato loves the word ‘boundaries’.

Sean came wandering through to the bedroom, where I was lying speaking to Lerato. He lifted up my shirt and started kissing my stomach.

‘Lerato,’ I said, ‘I gotta go. I think Sean wants sex.’

‘I do,’ said Sean, his voice muffled against my flesh.

‘Gross,’ said Lerato. ‘Too much information.’

‘Bye, sweetie,’ I said.

‘Bye. Have fun.’ Lerato laughed and rang off, and I put the phone down and reached for Sean.

Because the best side effect of our decision to adopt again was that fun sex was back on the cards. The worst thing about fertility treatment is that sex becomes – at best – a chore. It must happen on certain days and sometimes not on certain days. It’s very hard, even on the days that you aren’t trying to have a baby, to just see sex as a leisure activity. So while I was so unexpectedly sad about the failed IVF, at least we could go back to normal in the bedroom.

The next day Lilith saw the school and said she loved it. ‘They’re so kind,’ she gushed. ‘And Ruby-Mae seemed to really like them.’

I laughed. ‘You don’t have to sell me, Lilith,’ I said. ‘I’m already going.’

Trish had seen no reason that the girls shouldn’t start school on the same day, and Lilith and I had agreed that we’d start together the next Monday.

‘Sooner the better,’ said Lilith. ‘Best to get everything in place.’

And I thought she was talking about my adoption.

