---
title: Money
---

# Money
{:.page-break-after}

In the time that I now think of as ‘Before’, Ruby-Mae spent the night at us twice more. The first was with Lilith

‘Rebecca,’ Lilith had said to me on the phone, ‘I have the most awful favour to ask. They’re fumigating the flats and we need to spend one night somewhere. Is there any chance we could come to you? I’d go to a hotel but money is so tight and —’

‘It’s no problem,’ I interrupted her. ‘We’d love to have you.’

And it was a very pleasant evening. Lilith and I bathed the girls, then Sean read them bedtime stories while I cooked us supper, and Lilith perched on the counter in the kitchen, chatting to me and sipping a glass of wine.

I’d been complaining about how little time I was getting to paint those days, and Lilith must have been a bit drunk, because she suddenly said, ‘Explain to me how it works, Rebecca. The money side – how it is that you can make so much money from one painting?’

I was a bit taken aback, but I suppose lots of people wonder about this and no doubt think that it’s unfair.

‘When I started the Dogs,’ I explained, ‘they took off as a trend. The prices grew and grew. Left to itself, the trend would have spiked and prices would’ve dropped. But Joanne then started cutting back how many we sold, making it harder and harder to get a Dog just as the trend was about to peak. That doubled the demand. At first, Joanne managed how many we released, but since Amy, I really don’t produce that many anyway, so the supply side almost self-regulates.’

‘Will it all implode at some point?’ asked Lilith.

I’d often wondered this myself.

‘Joanne says that if we’re clever, it shouldn’t. We might even start a new trend item at some point. Basically, I do what Joanne says.’

‘You’re lucky to have someone so astute looking after it all,’ said Lilith.

‘I really am,’ I said. ‘Money’s just not be a worry any more, thanks to Joanne. And it looks like Sean and Adam’s app might take off, so that’s also great. We’re really lucky.’ I stopped myself, suddenly feeling bad talking about money and luck with a woman who was clearly down on both.

‘I’m sorry,’ I said. ‘I think I might be being insensitive.’

Lilith reached out a hand to me, a slightly awkward gesture because I was just out of reach and wasn’t sure if I was supposed to step towards her and take her hand, or just leave it. I stepped forward and sort of patted her hand, which felt stupid. But her words were reassuring.

‘Rebecca, it makes me happy that someone like you, someone so nice, has had good luck. It gives me hope. It makes me believe in the future.’ She stopped. ‘Some days, it’s very hard for me to see the future.’

Sean came back just then, and the talk became less intense. We laughed a lot, the three of us, and went to bed later than usual. The next morning, all three adults were slightly hung over, and Lilith looked like death.

‘Not used to drinking that much,’ she said, smiling weakly.

So Sean took the girls out for a ride while we sat with strong coffee and Myprodol, saying very little.

The next time Ruby-Mae spent the night was unremarkable. Lilith explained that she had another work function – with a few choice words about her new boss, who was behind all these functions – and she left Ruby-Mae with us. As always there was a big bag of clothes, and this time it was topped with a list of contact people. The list was a bit depressing: it had Eugenie Clark, Lilith’s boss’s cellphone and the landline at her work, the hotel where the function was, their GP and someone Lilith said was an aunt.

‘Sorry, Rebecca,’ said Lilith. ‘I know you and Sean want a whole list of contact people, but my life’s just not like that. To be honest, I’m not even sure the aunt is still at that number, and I can’t imagine a scenario where she’d be of any use. But still.’

‘It’s okay, Lilith,’ I said, and of course it was. Lilith actually arrived back to collect Ruby-Mae half an hour before she said she would, and the five of us – Sean, Lilith, me and the girls – ended up spending the whole day lazing about at our place. Lilith even made lunch because I was feeling tired and lacklustre.

‘I just wish we’d hear something about the adoption,’ I moaned to Lilith. ‘Every time I speak to Clarissa, she tells me to be patient. I’m tired of patient. I’m tired of waiting. And right now, I’m just tired.’

Lilith was sympathetic. ‘It’ll all suddenly come right. The child you’re waiting for will find you.’

I liked that – the idea that there was some sort of mutual cosmic search party taking place. My baby looking for me, and me looking for my baby.

***

The girls had started school by then. They’d both settled in easily, and I’d got into the habit of fetching Ruby-Mae when I fetched Amy every day at one o’clock.

‘You don’t need to,’ said Lilith. ‘I can be there by one-thirty. The school says that’s fine.’

‘It’s no trouble,’ I said. ‘She looks so confused when I leave her. I just can’t. These girls are like sisters – I can’t take one home and not the other.’

Lilith smiled broadly. ‘What a lovely thing to say,’ she said. ‘Thank you. I’ll fetch her from your place then. But let me know when it doesn’t suit, or when I can help you out.’

Things also seemed to be back to normal with Rose – we had a few playdates with all three girls, and Rose was back to her chatty and friendly self. She was also completely distracted by a new habit: moaning about her husband. It seemed that Aidan had taken to working late, and travelling a lot.

‘He got promoted and now it’s all out-and-about and get-on-the-plane,’ said Rose. ‘I know it comes with the territory but I feel so angry.’

It was during a playdate at my house, and the three of us were sitting drinking tea in the lounge while the girls watched a DVD in the TV room. Not exactly textbook parenting, but it was freezing outside. We’d all agreed ‘just this once’ and then laughed at ourselves for pretending that we were such organised moms that DVDs weren’t often a solution.

‘Wouldn’t you love to just get on a plane,’ I asked in response to Rose, probably not taking her worries as seriously as she wanted, ‘go somewhere and then just sleep?’

‘And maybe go shopping and to the beach,’ added Lilith.

‘No,’ I disagreed, ‘just sleep. I want to go somewhere and sleep.’

We’d got off the subject of Rose’s husband, but the truth was that I’d been feeling so worn out that sleep was all I could think of.

Lilith looked at me. ‘I think you might be coming down with something.’

‘That’s rich,’ I said. Lilith had been pale and listless for most of the afternoon, and she’d developed a hacking dry cough. ‘I’ll make you a deal,’ I said. ‘I’ll go to the doctor if you do.’

Rose suddenly looked worried. ‘If you guys have some horrible virus and Maggie and I catch it, Aidan will be furious.’

I thought she was joking, but she put down her teacup and started gathering her stuff.

‘Are you seriously going?’ I asked.

‘Rebecca,’ she said, ‘I just can’t afford to get sick.’ She waved a hand in front of her face, as if warding off unwanted germs, and hauled Maggie off the couch in the TV room. ‘I’m sorry, Rebecca, but it’s not fair.’

‘Um, okay,’ I said, not quite sure what wasn’t fair. I walked her to her car, and was careful not to hug or kiss her goodbye. I hadn’t been particularly worried about my health, but being treated like a pariah had me thinking that maybe I’d better have a check-up after all.

Inside, Lilith was coughing again.

‘She might have a point,’ I said. ‘We are neither of us an inspiring sight.’

Lilith laughed between coughs, and nearly choked. I brought her a glass of water, and her hand shook slightly as she took it. ‘I just need to sleep,’ she said.

‘Me too.’ We both sighed. ‘But please – let’s also both go to the doctor. Not because of Rose, but we might well have caught the same virus.’

Lilith nodded, but her eyes were unfocused and I wasn’t sure if she was actually listening to me.

‘Rose sometimes seems a bit nuts,’ Lilith observed out of nowhere. ‘I’m glad I found you.’

I smiled. ‘You make it sound as if it was either or,’ I said. ‘Maybe if you hadn’t met us, you’d have met far nicer park moms.’ I waited for Lilith to laugh, but she looked at me with her full attention.

‘You’re the perfect friend, Rebecca,’ she said, and her intensity made me uncomfortable.

I patted her hand, which was cold to the touch, and went to get us more tea. It wasn’t the first time I’d felt that Lilith needed something from me.

