---
title: Monday
---

# Monday

I didn’t hear from Lilith again that week until the Sunday, when she phoned and apologised for being so out of touch.

‘Are we still good for this week?’ she asked.

‘Sure,’ I said. ‘We’re looking forward to having Ruby-Mae.’

This wasn’t entirely the truth. My lethargy had come back over the weekend, and I’d decided to make an appointment with my doctor first thing on Monday. I probably could have done without an extra child around in the coming week, but I knew that Lilith’s need was greater than mine. And at the back of my mind I kept thinking about the baby I hoped we’d be adopting soon: I needed to get used to life with two children.

When I’d said this to Sean, he’d pointed out that having a baby would be quite different from having Ruby-Mae. ‘But I’ll help you,’ he said. ‘There’s something about that little girl that tugs on my heart strings.’

‘Like maybe the fact that she worships you,’ I suggested, smiling.

‘Oh, that helps.’ Sean laughed, but he also looked thoughtful. It was so obviously true: there was something about Ruby-Mae that really called out to him.

Lilith dropped Ruby-Mae at school on Monday morning, and then dropped Ruby-Mae’s bag off at our place. Usually Lilith and I arrived at the school at about the same time, but that morning I overslept, and when I got to school Maureen, the teacher, was rocking Ruby-Mae.

I walked over with Amy holding my hand.

‘Everything okay?’ I said, stooping to give Ruby-Mae a kiss on her head.

‘Mom’s just left,’ said Maureen. ‘She was a bit ... emotional.’

‘Did she explain the situation to you?’ I asked.

Maureen nodded. ‘It was hard for Rubes,’ she said, stroking the child’s back. ‘But I explained that Mommy was just sad because she loves Ruby so much and will miss her.’

‘Exactly,’ I said, although I felt a bit uncomfortable with the way Maureen had shortened Ruby-Mae’s name. Lilith never did that. ‘And we’re so excited to have you to stay at our place, Ruby-Mae,’ I said. ‘We love you too.’

Amy was stroking Ruby-Mae’s hair through this, and eventually Ruby-Mae turned her teary face to Amy. Amy took her hand and Ruby-Mae slid off Maureen’s lap. The two girls went off into the classroom, dark head leaning against light, and Amy turned only to give me a small wave, although she normally made a big production of her goodbye kiss.

‘You can be very proud of what a compassionate child Amy is,’ said Maureen, reading my mind. ‘There’re not many at this age who even register what their friends are feeling.’

‘I am very proud of her,’ I said. ‘And she does seem to have a special bond with Ruby-Mae.’

Maureen looked at me. ‘You must be worried about Lilith?’ she asked.

I laughed. ‘It’s a virus, Maureen,’ I said. ‘Of course she’ll get better. She’s just really worn out, which is why her doctor wants her to rest so thoroughly.’

Maureen nodded. ‘You know her better,’ she said, pushing her glasses up her nose. ‘You two obviously go back years.’

I would have explained that, in fact, we only went back a few months, but I suddenly felt a wave of tiredness. I don’t know if it was my general fatigue, or a more particular tiredness borne of constantly explaining myself and my relationships to other people. So I smiled, and told Maureen that I’d better be off home, and that I’d fetch the girls together at the usual time.

***

I’d expected to find Lilith waiting at the house, but I didn’t. She’d already been, and had left Ruby-Mae’s suitcase with Gugu. And a large suitcase at that – one of those supersize things people use when they’re immigrating. It looked new, but I knew Lilith wouldn’t have bought this monstrosity just for Ruby-Mae’s stay at our house. I stroked it where it sat waiting in the hallway, wondering idly if it was the bag Lilith had used when she ran away from her ex.

Gugu also handed me a note Lilith had left – handwritten and scrawled on a piece of lined paper:

[digi note: handwriting typeface needed for this note]

> Rebecca,
>
> Sorry this is so HUGE but I had no idea what she might want so I just threw in a whole lot. I even put a blanket at the bottom in case she needs that to feel at home – but probably totally unnecessary so maybe just leave that in until you really need it!
>
> Thank you, thank you. Remind Ruby-Mae that I love her.
>
> L
>
[end note]

I sighed and dialled Lilith’s number, but the phone went to voicemail, so I sent her a WhatsApp wishing her luck.

In Amy’s room I unpacked the stuff at the top of the case – Ruby-Mae’s toddler toothbrush and toothpaste, her facecloth, shampoo, detangling spray, soft hairbrush, pyjamas and a few changes of clothes. I really had no idea why Lilith had to pack so much every time, but I was used to it. I thought back to the day she’d disappeared and scared me in the park, and the huge bag of jerseys she’d had that time. I laughed, alone in the girls’ room. We all have our things, I thought.

We’d moved a spare single bed from the storeroom into Amy’s room after some debate.

‘She’s used to sleeping in her own room, isn’t she?’ said Sean. ‘Maybe she’d be happier in the spare room?’

‘To be honest,’ I said, ‘I don’t think she actually sleeps in her room. I think she sleeps with Lilith, and chances are she’s going to climb in with us. But at least this way she won’t be alone.’

‘Seems a lot of work for two nights,’ Sean said as we struggled to fit the bed through a doorway.

I grunted. I’d realised that I really wanted Ruby-Mae to enjoy her stay. I think on some level I thought this was the Universe’s way of testing whether or not I was ready for another baby. That, if I got this right, Clarissa would phone with good news. I didn’t tell Sean that. I knew he wouldn’t get it; or would feel the need to make me see things more rationally.

I didn’t want to see things more rationally.

The new baby would, of course, sleep in what had been the spare room. I’d thought about getting it ready: I’d heard stories of second adoptions where you get a few days’ notice and suddenly – wham! – you have a baby. But I reckoned a few days was enough. And anyway, what does a new baby really need with a fancy room? At the beginning, it would sleep in a camper cot next to Sean and my bed, the same way Amy had.

I was getting all tense thinking about the new baby, so I took a teddy from Ruby-Mae’s bag and put it on her bed. The rest of the stuff I left in the suitcase, which I shoved under the bed. If she needed anything over the next two days, we could get it. And if not, all the less to pack on Wednesday morning. I had a final chuckle to myself as I wondered how much luggage Lilith would have taken to hospital. The nurses probably thought she’d made a wrong turn on the way to the airport.

I went to my studio to paint, and only remembered that I’d meant to make a doctor’s appointment just before I left to fetch the girls. On the good side, I’d made another perfect miniature dog – five centimetres by five centimetres – with carefully worked detail, some bits using only a few hairs of a paint brush. It was still one of my classic dachshunds, but in tiny settings with minute and painstaking detail.

I was so excited about the new turn my work had taken that I sent Joanne a text: ‘Come see something new. R’

‘This afternoon?’ she replied almost immediately, and I said yes, that’d be perfect. I still wasn’t quite used to how quickly she was at my beck and call – but I loved it. When I’d commented on her reliability, she’d said, ‘You’re my cash cow, Rebecca, let’s be honest. Basically, I drop everything for a chance to sell your work.’

When I’d told that to Sean, he’d thought it rude, but I actually think it’s one of the most affirming things anyone has ever said to me. Although for a while I did take to mooing at her every time she answered the phone.

So I left the studio and picked the girls up from school, and because that was our usual routine in any event, Ruby-Mae was unperturbed. When we got home, I showed her the bed she’d be sleeping in for the next two nights, with her teddy, and her clothes in the cupboard.

‘Two sleeps?’ she asked, fingering the worn edges of her teddy’s ears.

‘That’s right,’ I agreed. ‘Two sleeps, and then Mommy will come fetch you.’

‘One, two sleeps,’ she repeated.

I wasn’t sure of it was a question or a statement, so I carried on, my voice with a false bright edge.

‘It’s going to be such fun, Ruby-Mae,’ I said, my one hand taking hers and my other stroking the back of Amy’s head. ‘And let’s get started with hotdogs for lunch.’

Ruby-Mae’s hand felt small, her bones lighter than Amy’s, her grasp less sure.

‘Becca?’ said Ruby-Mae.

‘Yes, love?’

‘I Ruby. Not Ruby-Mae.’

I felt like I was being disloyal to Lilith, but I really wanted Ruby-Mae to feel happy with us.

‘Ruby-Mae is a beautiful name, sweetie,’ I said. ‘But if you prefer Ruby, well that’s lovely too.’

‘Ruby.’ Her voice was sure.

I laughed again. ‘Great, now that we’ve got that established, let’s have hotdogs.’

I settled the girls at the table with their hotdogs, and an apparently hilarious debate ensued about the relative merits of eating Vienna sausages with tomato sauce (which was on offer) and peanut butter (which was not). I was a bit worried about Joanne coming to look at the work while the girls were around, but I hoped they’d stay with Gugu while I took Joanne through to my studio.

My studio is a converted outbuilding with north-facing floor-to-ceiling windows, and an enormous work table in the middle. I know some artists have messy, disorganised work spaces, and don’t allow anyone to clean or touch their stuff. But I am meticulously organised in my space, and with Gugu’s help I keep it very clean. I have shelves with designated spaces for all my paints and brushes, a lower set of narrow shelves for paper, a place for finished works (although I hold on to few of those these days) and mood boards set up between stations. I also had a small table for Amy, with a drawer for her paints and crayons. I didn’t let her play there when I was working seriously, but sometimes when I was desperate I’d let her draw while I painted, or else we’d go down the garden to the studio especially for her to play. Ruby had never been to the studio before.

When Joanne rang the gate bell, I asked Gugu to watch the girls, but they both immediately followed me to the front door. Gugu seemed powerless to stop them, so I turned and said to them, ‘If you come with me, you have to be very good. Understand?’

They both nodded solemnly, and we all went out to greet Joanne.

Up until that day, when I’d thought about Joanne, I’d always had this mental picture of her dressed in black, wearing bright red lipstick, with Trixie at her elbow. Both of them had wine glasses in their hands, and neither of them were smiling. Before, Joanne had normally come around when Amy was at school or with Sean – I’d tried to keep a vaguely professional division between being a mother and being an artist. It had never occurred to me to wonder if Joanne liked children, but my gut answer was that she didn’t – I imagined that she’d find the presence of two little girls very irritating. But I rationalised as I walked to the driveway that these were special circumstances. And, as Joanne would be the first to agree, as cash cow, I got to call the shots.

When we reached Joanne’s car, she’d already got out. She was wearing tall brown-suede boots with impossibly high heels, and tight cream leggings. The outfit was topped with a soft cream jersey that managed to both hug her figure and look snugly warm. If I’d worn that outfit, and managed to walk, by this time of the day it would have been covered in paint and muddy hand marks, not to mention tomato sauce and crayon.

I self-consciously readjusted the oversized shirt I was wearing, and wiped my hands on my faded jeans. When I’d got dressed that morning, my Mary Janes and chunky beads had felt like boho-chic. Now, I just felt drab. But Joanne could not have been less interested: she was down on her haunches greeting the girls.

‘Now, who are these two princesses?’ she said.

Amy has never been one to hold back when asked.

‘I am Amy. This is Mommy. This is Ruby for two sleeps. Who are you?’ She put her hands on her hips and pushed her face close to Joanne’s. I suddenly noticed a smear of tomato sauce under Amy’s nose, only slightly diluted by a snail trail of snot. Joanne didn’t even flinch.

‘I am Jo,’ she said. I almost jumped – I’d never dreamed of calling Joanne ‘Jo’. ‘I sell your mommy’s lovely paintings.’

‘Mommy paints dogs,’ said Amy, hands still on hips.

‘That is totally true,’ said Joanne. ‘Mommy probably paints the best dogs in the world.’

‘Yes!’ said Amy loudly, her face close to Joanne’s, as if scoring a point in a parliamentary debate.

Ruby had stood back for most of this exchange, but now stepped forward and touched Joanne’s soft jersey. ‘Soft.’ Then she touched Joanne’s lips. ‘Red.’

Joanne smiled. ‘Ruby,’ she said, ‘I think you have the makings of an artist.’

The four of us made our way to the studio, the girls each holding hands with Joanne. When we got there, I hastily dug around for some paper and crayons, which I put on Amy’s work table. ‘You two can stay and make art of you are very quiet,’ I said to them, in what I like to think of as my no-nonsense voice.

‘Shh, Mommy’s working,’ said Amy theatrically, sitting down at the table.

‘Ruby be’s quiet,’ agreed Ruby, sitting next to her.

Joanne beamed – beamed! – in delight. ‘Angels,’ she said, and then sighed. ‘I suppose we’d better look at your work now.’

‘You’re the one who wanted to see it so quickly,’ I said.

‘Yes, but that was before you offered me the chance to play with these two.’

‘I’m quite surprised, Joanne. I never took you as a children’s person.’

‘Why, because I’m gay?’ Joanne asked, her voice tightening.

‘No, not at all.’ I blushed, because the thought was so far from my mind that it hadn’t occurred to me Joanne might reach that conclusion. ‘Because – well, this sounds stupid – but because you’re so elegant.’

Joanne laughed generously, showing the depths of her mouth. Then she tipped her head and looked me straight in the eye. ‘I love children, Rebecca. I absolutely and completely adore them.’

‘So why don’t you have any?’ I asked. ‘And don’t say because you’re gay, because if I’m proof of anything, it’s that there’s more than one way to have a child.’

‘Trixie and I are talking about it,’ said Joanne. ‘It’s not something we tell many people, but we’re looking at a sperm donor or adopting. There’s this thing where they use one person’s egg, but the other woman carries it, so you both feel biologically connected to the baby.’

The comment left her mouth and sank into the space between us.

‘Oh God, Rebecca,’ said Joanne, her face growing pale with a flood of blush in the area around her nose. ‘I didn’t mean it like that.’

‘You have the most peculiar blush,’ I said, because that was what I was thinking.

The red spread onto Joanne’s cheeks. ‘I know,’ she said. ‘I try very hard not to blush, but I’m really embarrassed that I, of all people, would be so insensitive. Being biologically connected to a child is not that important.’

I smiled, and patted her hand. ‘I actually think the egg-and-carrying thing is a lovely idea,’ I said. ‘I’d totally do that.’ I paused for a moment. ‘If I was gay.’ Another moment. ‘And if my eggs and uterus actually worked. Definitely.’

We were both silent for a moment and then burst out laughing, that kind of teenage hysteria that seldom happens to adults. I’d known Joanne for about ten years, and never actually laughed with her – but this one was worth the wait.

When we had both sufficiently recovered, we looked at the paintings. Joanne loved them, and was fascinated by the technique. I explained that I’d gone through a miniature phase at university, even going on a specialised two-week course with a woman who lived in the Cotswolds, and who was known as an excellent miniature teacher. I’d loved that time – five art students from all over the world had somehow lived in two bedrooms in the artist’s cottage. We painted all day, learning the tricks of the miniature world while pushing the artist’s numerous overweight cats off the chairs and tables where we were working, and ate and sat. I’d moved on to a new technique when I got back to Joburg, and until now had never used the skills I’d learnt in the Cotswolds.

‘Well, you certainly seem to remember them,’ Joanne said after I’d told the story. ‘These pieces are fascinating. I think we can make them big. So to speak.’

I was delighted, and inspired. I wanted to start another one immediately, and I said as much.

‘Well,’ said Joanne, ‘why don’t you?’

I glanced at the girls and back at her.

‘I’ll play with them,’ she said, and before I could even open my mouth, she’d crouched down next to them in those perfect cream pants, and Amy was explaining the finer points of her crayon drawing, and Ruby had a hand entangled in Joanne’s smooth hair, and all three looked blissful.

So that’s what we did the Monday afternoon that Ruby came to stay. The girls played with Joanne, and I painted. The process is slow and you need to let paint dry, so I started a few, and touched up the one I’d worked on the previous week. I could hear the girls laughing – first near me in the studio, and later when the three of them went outside, I heard giggles and shrieks, and wasn’t sure if it was coming from the girls or Joanne.

At some point in the afternoon Trixie joined them, and when I’d finished working, the three of us cooked spaghetti and sausages for the girls, and had a glass of wine around the kitchen counter while they ate.

Trixie was unexpectedly dressed in gym clothes. Of course, she still looked svelte and elegant, but she also had a few wisps of hair out of place. She seemed more relaxed than I had ever seen her. She was smiling, which I’d never seen before, and it transformed her face – I could understand now why Joanne had fallen in love with her.

Joanne and Trixie were completely spellbound, and kept telling each other how cute the girls were, and what cute thing each girl had said to them, and how much fun they’d had. Then Sean came home and offered to bath the girls. Joanne and Trixie joined him, the three of them squeezed into the space next to the bath in Amy’s bathroom, while I cleared up the plates. Then Joanne and Trixie joined me on the patio for another glass of wine, while Sean read the girls a story and watched them fall asleep, Trixie went out and got sushi for the adults. We ate it off our laps, and talked about children and joy and whether Joanne and Trixie should adopt or do IVF.

It was a wonderful, relaxed, fun evening.

