---
title: Tuesday
---

# Tuesday

On Tuesday, after I dropped the girls at school, I tried to make an appointment with my doctor.

‘Dr Malcolm is away until Thursday afternoon,’ said the receptionist, an elderly woman I’d never warmed to. ‘Would you like to see Dr Nutten instead?’

I’d seen Dr Nutten once. He was a middle-aged man with a sheen of sweat on his brow and an almost permanent string of saliva connecting his top lip to the bottom. He had listened to my heart somewhere in the vicinity of my ovaries, and had seemed very anxious to check my breasts for lumps. Which would have been less unsettling if my reason for visiting wasn’t a sore throat and blocked sinuses.

‘I’d rather actually die then see Dr Nutten again,’ I said without thinking, then suddenly worried that Dr Nutten might be the elderly receptionist’s son. ‘I mean, I’m just more comfortable with Dr Malcolm.’

The receptionist grunted. ‘I can fit you in on Thursday at three.’

‘Thank you,’ I said, trying to sound suitably grateful and not like a difficult, Dr Nutten-hating person. ‘That’s perfect.’

It obviously wasn’t perfect at all, but I shrugged off my unease. Whatever was wrong with me wasn’t going to change in the next few days.

I spent the morning painting and fetched the girls from school feeling more energised than I had for a while. It was as if the act of making a doctor’s appointment had actually cured me, and I laughed at myself. Such a hypochondriac.

I decided to send Lilith a WhatsApp: ‘Girls good and happy. Am feeling better – hope you are too .’

I noticed that my previous good-luck message hadn’t been read, and that she hadn’t checked WhatsApp for over a day, but knowing Lilith needed total rest, I wasn’t that worried.

By about three, the girls appeared to be building a nest out of blankets under the dining-room table, and taking what felt like every toy in the house to join them. My lethargy had returned and I’d given up trying to redirect the game to something more contained. Instead, I lay on the couch reading a book and occasionally, irrelevantly, yelling, ‘Careful!’

At some point Sean called to say that he had to work late, and might take a potential investor out to supper after the meeting. I just felt relieved that I didn’t have to cook; I could fob the girls off with sandwiches, which I did a little later, and tried to bring bedtime earlier than usual.

But Ruby was restless and didn’t want to go to sleep. ‘One more sleep, Becca?’ she said.

‘Yes,’ I assured her. ‘Tomorrow Mommy’s coming to fetch Ruby.’

‘Sure?’

‘Very sure.’

This conversation was repeated every time she started nodding off – she’d jerk her head up and ask again. In the end I think she fell asleep from sheer exhaustion, and I was exhausted too.

I didn’t manage to stay up for Sean, and didn’t even hear him getting into bed.

When Ruby woke up screaming in the early hours of the morning, Sean and I both went to her.

‘How’d it go?’ I whispered to him as I rocked her.

‘Good, but nothing solid,’ he said, stroking Ruby’s back. ‘You? Everything okay here?’

‘Ruby was a bit restless,’ I said. ‘She seems anxious about Lilith fetching her.’

‘Funny thing,’ said Sean. ‘I bet Lilith is counting the minutes to see her lovely girl.’

I smiled. ‘She probably is.’

Sean nodded and left, careful to be quiet. I stayed with Ruby until she fell asleep again, thinking how we’d miss her when she went home. She’d so quickly felt like part of the family.

I sighed. Maybe I did need another child to feel complete. Maybe tomorrow would be the day Clarissa phoned with some news.

