---
title: Wednesday
---

# Wednesday

This was the plan: I would fetch the girls from school, and let Lilith know when we were home. Lilith expected to be discharged by that time, and would fetch Ruby-Mae immediately. If, for some reason, Lilith didn’t hear from me, she would assume that we’d be home by two in the afternoon, and would come through anyway.

And this is what really happened:

I fetched the girls from school at 12.30pm.

‘Where’s my mommy?’ asked Ruby as soon as she saw me.

‘She’s not back yet, Ruby,’ I said. ‘Just now. After lunch.’

But I immediately sent Lilith a WhatsApp: ‘Heading home with girls. See you soon?’ I couldn’t help noticing that my previous messages were unread, and that Lilith’s status reflected that she’d last checked her messages on Sunday afternoon at 4pm.

I got the girls home and gave them lunch. Ruby was fretting, and I felt a twinge of worry. Surely Lilith should be back on her phone by now?

I called her number and it went straight to voicemail: ‘Lilith, we’re all ready for you. Give me a call if there’s a problem.’

As I put the phone down, I realised what must have happened – it was so obvious and also exactly the reason why we had the back-up plan of 2pm. Her battery must have died and being Lilith, she’d forgotten the charger. I chuckled: she’d packed a huge case for Ruby but she had still managed to forget a phone charger for herself.

‘Mommy will be here soon,’ I told Ruby.

But 2pm came and went, and Lilith didn’t come. My nerves were on high alert and I jumped at the sound of every passing car. The next one had to be Lilith, every time. And even though I knew it was pointless, between 2pm and 3pm I left three more voice messages.

‘Where’s Mommy?’ said Ruby, and I was so grateful that she couldn’t tell the time. ‘Soon baby,’ I said. ‘Soon.’

By four, I was really starting to get irritated. I checked the phone again, but my messages were still unread and it still went to voicemail. All I could think was that there had been some sort of misunderstanding. Maybe she’d meant next Wednesday? Or changed the day? I didn’t mind at all if we had Ruby-Mae a bit longer; I just needed to find out what was happening. Partly, for my own peace of mind, but mostly because I wanted to know what to tell Ruby-Mae. Not for the first time, I felt so frustrated that we all only have each other’s cellphone numbers. It’s all very well until someone forgets their charger at home.

Think laterally, I told myself. How else could I get hold of Lilith? What would I have done in the days before cellphones? Put like that, the answer was obvious. I looked up the number for the Sandton Clinic, the hospital she’d told me she was going to.

‘Has Lilith Browne checked out yet?’ I asked the woman who answered. I realised I was making it sound like a hotel. ‘I mean, been discharged.’

‘Hang on,’ said the woman. After a few minutes of elevator music, she came back. ‘Please spell,’ she said.

I spelt ‘Browne’, emphasising the ‘e’, and ‘Lilith’ and then, when she couldn’t find anyone, I suggested she look under ‘Brown’ without an ‘e’. And maybe ‘Lili’.

‘The last person with the surname ‘Brown’ on my system was Mr Edgar Jonas Brown, no “e”,’ said the woman. ‘He was discharged on Saturday.’

I must have misunderstood which hospital she was at, I thought, but that was okay because I remembered the name of their GP. So I looked up his number and called. I explained to the receptionist that I was looking for information on a patient who the doctor had checked in to hospital, and who was now late to fetch her child. Dr Schmidt called me back within ten minutes.

‘Shireen explained your call to me,’ he said. ‘But there must be a misunderstanding. I haven’t seen Lilith Browne for about six months.’

‘What?’ I said. ‘No, that can’t be right.’

‘I can’t really tell you much more without breaking patient confidentiality at this point,’ he said. ‘But. Well, if she doesn’t turn up, get your lawyer to give me a call.’

‘*What*?’ I said.

‘Just saying. Just in case. Never know. Sure it’ll be fine.’ He spoke so quickly the sentences snowballed over each other.

‘Do you know something that I should know?’ I said, choosing my words. ‘I’ve got her child here with me.’

‘Gotta go. Let me know.’ And he hung up.

I tried Lilith’s phone again. Voicemail.

Then I tried her office number. A woman’s voice answered the phone, taking me by surprise because I hadn’t thought through what I was going to say. ‘Um, hi, I’m looking for Lilith,’ I said.

‘Sick leave,’ said the woman. ‘Although we’re starting to wonder.’

‘What do you mean?’ I asked. ‘She’s only been off for two days.’

‘More like two months,’ said the woman. ‘Keeps telling us she’ll be back soon, but no sight so far. Suits me cos I’m temping ... It’s a nice place to work – she’s nuts to walk out.’

‘Are you serious?’ But none of that made any sense. I was sure that there was some misunderstanding, that this temp woman had things backwards somehow. I put down the phone and tried Lilith’s phone again. Voicemail.

‘Where’s my mommy?’ said Ruby, coming up next to me.

I looked at her pale face, framed by Lilith’s fly-away blonde hair.

‘I think maybe we had a misunderstanding, love,’ I said, thinking aloud. ‘Maybe it’s tomorrow.’

Ruby looked at her feet. ‘Mommy’s not coming,’ she said.

‘Of course she is, Ruby,’ I said, hoping I sounded reassuring. ‘She’d never leave you.’

Ruby walked slowly back to the bedroom, where she’d been playing with Amy. I watched her as she climbed onto the bed and held her teddy. Amy was playing on the floor, oblivious.

‘Gugu,’ I called, ‘watch the girls. I’m just going somewhere. And if Lilith comes, phone me *immediately*.’ I rushed past her, and then turned back and took hold of her arms. ‘Please. It’s important, Gugu. Phone me the moment she comes.’

Gugu nodded, and I kissed the girls goodbye. Amy was so engrossed in her game that she barely lifted her head to me, and Ruby just held her teddy closer.

‘I’ll be back soon,’ I said. I nearly added that I was going to find her mommy, but I stopped myself.

I drove as fast as I could to Lilith’s flat. When I got there, I parked and ran up the stairs to Lilith’s unit. I knocked on the door but there was no answer – I hadn’t really expected one. Lilith would hardly be sitting at home while we waited for her.

I felt like I should peer through a window, but the only window on the door side of the flat was frosted glass covered by a blind, which I knew was for the kitchen. There was no point trying to pretend that I’d actually see anything.

So I went downstairs – the real reason I had come – to Mrs Clarke’s sex shop.

***

When I was younger, the people I knew had gone through a phase where we found it the biggest laugh to buy sex toys for a friend, or a porn movie, or kinky lingerie. So I’d been into sex shops before, but not for a long time. I was almost jogging as I entered the shop, but came to a halt to allow my eyes to adjust to the dim lighting. This was something I hadn’t remembered, or else Mrs Clarke’s sex shop was different from the ones I’d been to. The space I was in was lit only by red light, and seemed to be an entrance hall. Across from me were three doors, with a luminous red sign with cursive writing above each: ‘Lingerie and outfits’, ‘Movies’ and ‘Toys’. The hall was papered with a heavy red brocade, and the carpet was soft. Surprisingly, the music playing was classical.

‘So what do you think, Rebecca?’ said a voice behind me, and I started.

Eugenie Clarke lumbered forward from a desk I hadn’t noticed in an alcove near the door. Next to the desk was a chaise longue.

‘It’s ...’ I struggled to find the words without giving offence. So I just said what I thought. ‘It’s classy. I hadn’t expected that. It makes me want to look further.’

Eugenie laughed, her great breasts heaving. ‘Well, go ahead, my dear. Don’t let me stop you.’

My cold panic flooded back.

‘Mrs Clarke, Eugenie,’ I said, ‘I came to ask if you’ve seen Lilith. Ruby-Mae is staying at us, and Lilith was supposed to fetch her by two today.’

Eugenie Clarke raised her plucked eyebrows. ‘It’s not like Lilith to be late to fetch Ruby-Mae,’ she said.

‘No,’ I said, then stopped. ‘Although to be honest, this is not the first time. But it’s different – Ruby’s been with us since Monday morning. I thought Lilith would be bursting to see her. And the doctor has stopped seeing Lilith and the hospital doesn’t know anything about her.’

‘Doctor? Hospital? What are you talking about?’

So I started to explain, trying to keep calm, trying to remember. When I reached the part about Lilith being so exhausted and sick that she had to check into hospital, Mrs Clarke sat down on the chaise longue, causing an ominous sigh from its joints.

‘I knew that girl was sick,’ she said. ‘But I had no idea.’

‘That’s the thing,’ I said. ‘Neither do the hospital or the doctor. I have no idea where she actually went. I have no idea where she is.’

I reached into my bag and pulled out my cellphone, almost shaking it at Mrs Clarke. ‘She doesn’t answer. She hasn’t read my messages.’

With a creak of her knees, Eugenie Clarke stood up, pushing herself off the chaise longue with one hand. ‘Give me a second,’ she said.

She touched a switch on the wall, and suddenly the foyer was flooded with light. The sense of mystery evaporated, and the worn paths on the carpets became visible. There was a patch on the chaise longue that needed darning. Mrs Clarke checked what appeared to be a bank of security screens behind her desk, and sighed. ‘Oh, not him. He’s so hard to shift.’

She went through the door marked ‘Movies’, and I heard her explaining to someone that the shop was briefly closing due to a family emergency.

‘But you never close,’ retorted a whiny male voice.

‘Well, I’m closing now, so move it,’ said Mrs Clarke.

I was expecting her to be accompanied by a seedy sort of man, possibly in a raincoat, but the man who strode out was tall and good-looking, in an expensive suit, like some sort of captain of industry. He glared at me as he walked out.

‘Perv,’ said Mrs Clarke, with no apparent sense of irony, as she closed the door after him. Then she turned back to me. ‘I have Lilith’s keys,’ she said. ‘I think we should see if we can find anything in the flat.’

Despite the fact that not ten minutes before, I’d been wanting to press my nose to the windowpanes, I now felt strange violating Lilith’s privacy.

‘Should we really do this?’ I said to Eugenie as we walked back up the stairs to Lilith’s flat. ‘She could just be stuck in traffic with a dead cellphone.’

‘Two things,’ said Eugenie. ‘Traffic from where? And she could use a public phone like we all did back in the day.’

‘Back in the day, when we actually knew each other’s phone numbers by heart,’ I countered.

‘True,’ agreed Eugenie, unlocking Lilith’s door. She pushed it open, revealing the familiar bright space of Lilith’s flat.

The first thing I saw was Lilith’s phone lying on the small white dining-room table.

I blinked, but nothing changed. Next to it was a piece of paper with Lilith’s distinctive writing:

> I’m sorry.
{:.letter}

And that was all.

Eugenie and I stood next to each other, looking down at the note. Eugenie’s bulk seemed to support me, because I was weak, like someone had dissolved my bones.

‘It could mean anything,’ said Eugenie, her voice coming from far away.

‘Yes,’ I said, but my voice was so soft I don’t think she heard me. I cleared my throat and tried to speak again, but Eugenie was striding away from me to the little passage that led to the bedrooms. Without her beside me, I needed to grip the table.

‘Good God, it looks like all Ruby-Mae’s clothes are gone,’ she called out. ‘I thought you said she was just with you for two days?’

I wanted to follow Eugenie, but I couldn’t. I pulled out a chair and sat down as she banged closed more cupboard doors.

‘I think they’re all with me,’ I said, my voice barely a whisper. ‘And Lilith always over-packs. Even for the park.’

‘Well, wherever she is, *she* hasn’t over-packed,’ said Eugenie, who’d somehow heard me from Lilith’s bedroom. ‘Most of her stuff seems to be here.’

I felt a slight lifting of my panic – that was consistent with her going to hospital.

‘Her toiletries aren’t here though,’ called Eugenie. ‘And I’m guessing some underwear and nighties, because there are some almost empty drawers.’

‘Makes sense,’ I said, my voice unexpectedly booming. ‘For hospital,’ I added, at a more normal volume.

‘But she didn’t go to the hospital,’ said Eugenie, reappearing at the doorway to the passage, ‘did she?’

‘Maybe I misunderstood. Maybe she’s at another hospital.’

Eugenie rubbed her hand across her cleavage. ‘Good point,’ she said. ‘We’ll just have to phone them all.’

‘I need to get back to the girls,’ I said.

‘Are you okay keeping Ruby-Mae tonight?’ she asked.

‘I promise, having Ruby is not the problem,’ I said.

‘Well then, let’s leave it for tonight – maybe Lilith will find a way to call you, or realise that you must be panicking.’ We both glanced at the cellphone and the note on the table. ‘I’ll come by to your place tomorrow, and we can call all the hospitals and anything else while the girls are at school.’

I liked that: a good plan. I felt calmer.

‘I’ll be back home by nine,’ I said. I gave her my address and phone number, and then headed back home to the waiting children.

In the car, I tried to think out logically what could have happened, but it was almost as if my mind couldn’t go there. My thoughts became a blur of white noise and my hands started to sweat. I had no idea what was going in, and none of the options bore thinking about.

When I got back home, Gugu had the girls eating supper in front if the TV. I could have hugged her. We stood at the door together for a moment.

‘She’s gone,’ said Gugu, her voice flat.

‘Lilith?’ I said. ‘Well, she’s missing.’

‘She’s gone,’ repeated Gugu. ‘This happens.’

‘Oh really, Gugu,’ I said, because I was actually at a total loss of what else to say. But her words tipped me over the edge again. I phoned Sean.

‘We’ve got a bit of a situation here,’ I said. ‘Lilith hasn’t pitched to fetch Ruby-Mae, and we don’t actually know where she is.’ I filled him in on what I’d done, that Ruby would be staying another night, and that Eugenie was coming to help me the next morning.

‘Okay,’ he said. ‘Because maybe you misunderstood, right? Maybe she’s actually fetching her tomorrow.’

‘Maybe,’ I said. ‘I’m just worried because she wasn’t in the hospital and has obviously been lying to me.’

‘It’s not like she’d just leave Ruby-Mae with us and never come back,’ said Sean with a laugh. ‘Obviously there’s been a misunderstanding or some unforeseen situation. You’ll find her at another hospital with another doctor, and we’ll laugh about this, right?’

‘Yeah,’ I said. ‘You’re probably right.’

But when I put the phone down, Gugu was still watching me.

‘She’s gone,’ she said.

‘Don’t be ridiculous,’ I said. But my heart wasn’t in it.

For now at least, Lilith was gone.

