---
title: Thursday
---

# Thursday

On Thursday morning, before Sean left for work, he spent some time cuddling Ruby-Mae.

‘I know you’re worried, sweetie,’ he said. ‘But we’ll find out why Mommy was so late, and she’ll be here soon. And Rebecca and I love you, so you mustn’t be worried.’

Ruby-Mae rested her head against his chest. ‘I want my mommy,’ she said.

‘I know, baby,’ he said. ‘I know.’

He looked worried when he left a little while later.

‘Keep me updated, okay, love?’

‘Sure,’ I said. ‘I’m taking the girls to school and then Eugenie will be here. I’m sure we’ll find her.’

He must have heard the doubt in my voice. ‘Rebecca,’ he said, taking hold of my upper arms. ‘You will find her. This is just a misunderstanding. Got it?’

I nodded. ‘Got it.’

He kissed me and turned to go. Then he turned back. ‘Rebecca, phone Lerato. Just kind of fill her in. In case we need a lawyer.’

I wanted to ask him why we would need a lawyer if it was all just a misunderstanding. But I already felt exhausted. ‘Okay,’ was all I said.

Sean nodded and looked at me. ‘Phone me,’ he said one final time, and left.

I took the girls to school, and Maureen raised her eyebrows when she saw that I still had Ruby with me.

‘There’s been a misunderstanding,’ I said. ‘It seems that Ruby-Mae is still with us.’

Maureen looked at me. ‘Till when?’ she said.

‘I’m not sure.’

‘I’m just going to have to phone Lilith and confirm,’ she said.

I rubbed my forehead. ‘Maureen, I can’t get hold of Lilith and I can’t find her,’ I said softly, so that Amy and Ruby wouldn’t hear me. ‘If you can get hold of Lilith, nobody will be happier than me.’

Maureen looked taken aback. ‘Okay,’ she said. ‘Well, I’ll try.’

I nodded. She obviously didn’t understand exactly how hard I’d tried already, and I didn’t have the energy to explain it to her.

‘You do that,’ I said.

At home, I tried Lilith’s number again. Voicemail. Although I knew that already, because her phone was sitting, battery dead, in her flat.

Eugenie arrived on time, looking flustered.

‘I’ve barely slept,’ she said. ‘I have such a bad feeling about this.’

‘It’s bound to be a misunderstanding.’ My voice sounded mechanical, even to me.

‘Well, then you and I have both misunderstood a whole lot of stuff,’ said Eugenie. ‘We must both be very stupid.’

‘Okay,’ I said, relieved that I could let go of the pretence. ‘It’s not a misunderstanding. But I’m sure there’s still a really good explanation.’

Eugenie looked at me for a long moment, her hand resting on her generous cleavage. ‘Okay,’ she said, after what felt like an aeon. ‘Let’s work on that presumption and sort this out.’

We sat down, each with a paper and pen, and brainstormed every hospital in Joburg. Then we googled to check if we’d missed anything.

‘Maybe,’ I said as we were doing this, ‘maybe she had to go to a state hospital and was too embarrassed to tell us that she couldn’t afford private. That would explain everything.’

‘Everything?’ said Eugenie.

I thought about Ruby-Mae holding on to Sean the night before, not knowing where her mother was. ‘Well,’ I said, ‘it would explain a lot.’

We split the list of hospitals between us, and both started phoning – going through all possible spellings of Browne each time, and at the state hospitals being transferred from department to department while they tried to figure out who could actually tell us what patients were or weren’t there.

By eleven we had both finished our lists.

‘So there’s nothing,’ said Eugenie, her hand worrying her cleavage. ‘Not in any of the local private or public hospitals, unless she’s under another name.’

‘Why would she do that?’ I asked.

‘Why would she have done any of this, Rebecca?’

‘Fair point,’ I said. ‘What next?’

‘I’m going to go to Johannesburg Hospital,’ she said after a pause. ‘I think your idea about her being embarrassed about being in a public hospital is the most likely explanation, and I’m not sure they really knew what they were doing on the phone.’

‘Okay,’ I said. I liked letting her take control.

‘If I find nothing, I’ll come back here. And then ...’ Her voice fizzled out.

‘And then?’ I echoed.

‘Well, let’s see what happens.’

Eugenie left, and after trying to paint with absolutely no success, I phoned Sean and filled him in.

‘Okay,’ he said. ‘Okay.’ But I could hear that it wasn’t okay. He’d stopped talking about misunderstandings.

‘If she finds nothing,’ he eventually said, ‘call me. I’ll come home.’

By then it was time to fetch the girls. As I drove to the school, I wondered what I could do with them while we waited for Eugenie. Something to keep all our minds off Lilith. At the back of my mind, I felt like I’d had something planned for this Thursday afternoon, so as I pulled up to the school, I checked the calendar on my phone.

Oh hell, I thought: the doctor’s appointment.

I considered cancelling it. Compared to what was going on, being tired was hardly urgent. But the thought of dialling the number and speaking to the receptionist and then rescheduling just seemed like more effort than actually going. So I decided to keep the appointment.

After our usual post-school greeting ceremony, I loaded the girls into the car, grateful that Ruby wasn’t asking about Lilith, and took them home to Gugu. I texted Eugenie that I was going to the doctor, but that she should come back to us anyway when she was done, and I told the girls that I was leaving them with Gugu for a bit. It felt like a treat, allowing myself to stop worrying about Lilith for the next hour. But, by the time I actually left, I was feeling exhausted again and queasy – my tummy once again in the knot I’d started to feel when Lilith had failed to arrive. I was glad I hadn’t cancelled the appointment.

***

Melanie Malcolm has been my doctor since Sean and I moved to the area. She’s looked after all our aches and pains over the years; she watched me go through my fertility hopes, dreams, battles and losses and, when I finally became a parent, she started looking after Amy too.

Our appointments always start with a catch-up session.

Mel’s opening words were surprising. ‘You look so well, Rebecca,’ she said. ‘Life with Amy must be agreeing with you.’

I looked at her carefully, wondering if she’d lost her mind. ‘I feel,’ I started, ‘I feel like the end of the world, I’m so tired. One of my friends has had a really bad virus, and I’m scared I also have it. But also, I’m not scared, because I just want to sleep.’

‘Any big changes, stresses lately?’ asked Mel, pulling her notes towards her. ‘Give me a bit of a picture of where your life is at.’

‘We tried IVF again and it failed,’ I said. Mel raised her eyebrows and made a note in her doctor’s scrawl. ‘That was a bit upsetting. But now we’re trying to adopt again, and that’s great, but it’s stressful waiting to hear something. Oh, and my friend Lilith – the one with the virus – has disappeared, leaving her daughter with me. She was supposed to fetch her yesterday, and now we can’t find her anywhere.’

Mel raised her eyebrows. ‘Lots going on,’ she said, making another note. ‘I’m not surprised you’re tired.’

‘But I’ve been through worse,’ I said. ‘And I’ve never felt like this.’

‘You didn’t have a toddler then,’ said Mel. ‘Everything is a bit worse when you have a toddler. But let’s not rule anything out yet. Tell me about the friend?’

I told her what little I knew about Lilith’s illness and the hospital rest she was supposed to have, and how she’d now disappeared.

‘God, how weird. Even the medical part doesn’t make sense,’ said Mel. ‘Are you sure it’s not psychiatric?’

I was about to completely deny the possibility, but I had to admit that Lilith wasn’t one of the top five mentally stable people I knew.

‘But she’s been looking terrible,’ I said to Mel. ‘Really sick. Physically. And she sleeps all the time.’

‘Hmm. So the IVF,’ continued Mel. ‘When was that?’

I did a mental calculation. ‘Um, about three months ago we started,’ I said. ‘So we found out I wasn’t pregnant about eight or nine weeks ago, I think.’

She made a note. ‘Everything back to normal physically since then?’ she asked.

‘Other than this exhaustion, I think so,’ I said. ‘I was a bit low afterwards, but I think that’s got better since we decided to adopt again.’

‘Periods normal?’

‘Yes,’ I started to say, and then stopped. ‘Well, I was very regular before the IVF. And then obviously I had a period after the IVF. And then ...’ My brain scrambled. I knew logically that there must have been another period, but I honestly couldn’t remember. ‘Well,’ I said, ‘I don’t actually know when the last one was, but it must have happened.’

Mel put down her pen and pushed her glasses up her nose. ‘Any nausea?’ she said.

‘Yes!’ I said. ‘How did you know?’

I looked at her and she raised her expressive eyebrows. With what felt like a wave of cold through my body, I realised what she was thinking. Mostly, I felt mortified for her that she could be so wrong.

‘No, Mel,’ I said. ‘I’m not.’

‘There’s a phenomena of people getting pregnant the cycle after an IVF, as I’m sure you know,’ she said.

I laughed. ‘No, Mel, the doctors just tell you that to stop you from killing yourself,’ I explained. ‘It’s not something that actually happens to people.’

‘I suspect a few learned studies would disagree with you,’ said Mel with a smile. ‘But I take your point that you’ve spent many years trying to get pregnant and gone through a lot of IVF, so it’s unlikely that you’re pregnant.’

‘Exactly,’ I said. ‘I have a virus.’

‘Most likely,’ agreed Mel, and it was hard not to feel that her tone was placating. ‘Still,’ she continued. ‘There’s this rule that I was taught: Assume every woman is pregnant, and every pregnancy is ectopic, before you rule anything out. So, for the sake of my own ethics, can we do a pregnancy test?’

I looked at Mel. This was a total waste of time, and I couldn’t believe she was quite so naïve.

‘See it as a bet,’ she said. ‘If you’re not pregnant, you don’t pay for the test.’ She was already preparing a syringe.

I shrugged, and held out my arm for the blood test.

Mel put the blood on a stick much like a urine test, and while we waited she did a full examination: my heart (normal), blood pressure (slightly high), throat (bit red), nose (slightly runny, clear mucus), ears (fine), glands (fine), breasts (no lumps), lungs (clear) and temperature (normal). She smiled as she examined me, and we made small talk about Amy and Sean and the weather, and I tried to tell her a bit more about Lilith’s disappearance. I was honestly barely thinking about the pregnancy test sitting like a time bomb on the counter, except to wonder slightly at Mel’s failure to properly grasp my infertility.

After the examination, she asked me to get dressed, and went back through the door of the examination room, picking up the pregnancy test as she passed, and glancing down. I couldn’t see her face, and she didn’t make a sound, but I knew she’d be feeling foolish to have done the test at all. I felt a bit sorry for her, actually, and vindicated that I knew my body so well.

I went through to the office a few minutes later, still fastening the buttons of my jersey. ‘So,’ I said, sitting across from her, ‘what do you think’s wrong with me?’

Wordlessly, Mel slid the test over her desk. She knew how many I’d seen and done in my life; she knew I needed no instruction. And she knew that I’d never before seen a test like this one, with a little positive cross where there was usually a single line of sorrow.

I picked it up and looked at it, and then looked up at her for confirmation.

She nodded, and I swear, her eyes had tears in them. ‘You’re pregnant, Rebecca,’ she said. ‘You’re so definitely pregnant that I didn’t really need the test to know.’

‘But ...’ I said, ‘but I can’t be.’

‘As it turns out,’ said Mel, ‘you can. I’m guessing you’re about seven or eight weeks along.’

I left Mel’s office with a pamphlet on pregnancy, a script for folic acid supplements (and instructions to start them immediately), instructions to make an urgent appointment with my gynae for a scan (‘You should be able to hear a heart beat by now’) and reassurance that the fatigue would eventually pass. I paid as if in a dream and, clutching all the bits of paper to my chest, walked slowly to my car.

In the car, I couldn’t formulate my thoughts. My brain couldn’t get itself around this piece of information, this piece of information that I had finally and absolutely resigned myself to never owning – that I was growing a baby inside my body, all on my own.

I almost phoned Sean from the car. But we’d waited so long for this to happen to us that I thought it deserved a personal delivery. Also, it would be such a shock to him. I wanted to see his reaction. I considered going to his office, but then remembered that Eugenie was expecting to find me at home. I wasn’t sure how I was going to hide my euphoria – euphoria that was completely inappropriate in the face of Lilith’s disappearance – but I knew I would have to: Sean needed to be the first person I told.

The only thing I did before I went home was phone the gynae to make an appointment for a scan. At first the receptionist told me that I’d have to wait three weeks, but when I told her who I was, and what had happened, she suddenly had an appointment available for me the very next morning. I suddenly understood why the wait at the gynaecologist could be hours after the appointment time, but I wasn’t going to complain when it was working in my favour.

***

Eugenie and I arrived at my house at almost exactly the same time. I gave my tummy a fond stroke, then composed my face and climbed out of the car. Eugenie hauled herself out of her own car.

‘Anything?’ I asked.

Eugenie shook her head. She looked exhausted; her eyes were underlined with dark shadows and her face looked like it had slipped slightly from its moorings.

‘Cup of tea, I think,’ I said, putting an arm around her and leading her into the house.

As Eugenie and I came in the front door, Amy and Ruby walked through from the TV room holding hands. Amy hadn’t let Ruby out of reach since the first signs that Lilith was not going to arrive as expected.

‘Clarkie!’ yelled Ruby, letting go of Amy and hurling herself towards Eugenie. ‘Did you bringed my mommy?’

Eugenie caught Ruby and held her in her arms while she stroked her hair. ‘No, babe,’ she said. ‘Clarkie’s not too sure where Mommy is. But I know that wherever she is, she’s thinking of her Ruby-Mae.’

It was exactly the right thing to say, and I envied Eugenie suddenly. Ruby wrapped her arms as far around Eugenie as they would go, and leant her head against one enormous boob. ‘Boobie,’ she said, in case anyone was unsure. But she sounded peaceful.

As I watched them, my phone rang. It was Sean, wanting to know if we’d had any luck.

‘Nothing,’ I said.

‘Have you phoned Lerato yet?’

‘No.’

‘Okay, phone her. I’m coming home.’

‘Sean,’ I started, somehow needing him on the line, even though I wasn’t going to tell him about the baby. But he’d already rung off.

Eugenie entertained the girls by dancing with them – an unexpectedly graceful sight – while I first tried to phone Lerato, and settled on leaving a voice message. And then sending a WhatsApp. And a text message.

Eugenie smiled at me. ‘I think you’ve covered every base there.’

I laughed; Eugenie Clark was proving to be unexpectedly comforting.

I joined the dancing, and Eugenie and I first tried to teach the girls to do some ballet steps, and then to waltz. In an attempt to explain the steps, we found ourselves waltzing with each other – and began to laugh so hard we almost had to prop each other up.

Sean walked in on this scene, and looked at Eugenie with undisguised curiosity.

‘Eugenie Clarke. My husband, Sean,’ I introduced them. ‘Sean, I told you about Eugenie. Eugenie owns a sex shop.’

I don’t know why I thought this was the most important piece of information to pass on; I must have been more tired and rattled than I realised.

Sean shook hands with Eugenie. ‘I’m sure it’ll become clear to me why we need a sex shop at this juncture, but nice to meet you in the meantime.’

Eugenie and I both laughed, and Sean joined in despite having no idea what was going on. I asked Gugu to take the girls for a bath, muttering that she’d be paid for all this overtime, and then the three of us sat down in the kitchen as Eugenie and I told Sean what we knew.

Sean was still for a moment and then looked at me. ‘Go and look in that suitcase Lilith brought,’ he said.

‘What?’

‘The bag she packed for Ruby. Go and look what’s in it.’

‘Okay,’ I said, unsure how taking a tally of Ruby’s clothes was going to help, but unsure what else to do.

I pulled the bag out from where I’d hidden it under Ruby’s bed, and opened it. I took out the remaining clothes – which I now realised were the bulk of Ruby’s wardrobe. Under the clothes was a layer of toys, and under the toys, the blanket Lilith had mentioned in her letter. I sighed. Then a thought caught, and I slowly lifted the blanket. Underneath the blanket was a layer of newspaper. My hands shook slightly as I removed the newspaper, folding it carefully as if I might need it again.

At the bottom of the suitcase was a transparent Flip File and a photo album. I picked up the Flip File and began to turn the pages.

In it was Ruby’s birth certificate (father marked unknown, I noticed), her vaccination records, a section that seemed to be of early school reports, a receipt for the years’ fees from our school and some letters from private primary schools reflecting that Ruby’s name was on their lists. The photo album was a thick one. The first photo was an out-of-focus picture of a far fatter, pregnant Lilith. I flipped through and discovered a photographic history of Ruby’s life so far. The last photograph looked like a recent studio portrait of Lilith and Ruby, their blonde heads touching, their blue eyes sparkling.

I picked up the file and photo album, walked through to the kitchen and put them on the table. Wordlessly, Sean looked at the Flip File, and then pushed it over to Eugenie.

‘She’s run off and left Ruby-Mae with us,’ said Sean, his calm voice belied by the fingers raking through his hair.

‘She would never leave Ruby-Mae,’ I hissed, scared that the little girl would hear. ‘Never.’

Eugenie and Sean glanced at each other, allies already.

‘I think she’s been planning this for a while,’ said Sean.

I was about to deny this, remind them how much Lilith loves Ruby, but I paused. I was back at that day in the park when I lost Lilith. I was back at the first time Ruby-Mae spent the night and Lilith was late.

And in a glimpse I saw that I might need to rewrite Lilith and my history. Or perhaps reread what had always been written.

‘But why?’ I eventually managed. ‘Lilith loves Ruby-Mae. She wouldn’t do this.’

I felt, unfairly perhaps, that Sean and Eugenie weren’t mothers; that they couldn’t understand. I knew that Lilith wouldn’t just walk away from her daughter.

‘She wouldn’t do this,’ Eugenie said slowly, ‘unless she got it into her head that it was best for Ruby-Mae. She’d have a good reason. Sometimes mothers make hard choices.’ Something in her voice made me realise that my assumption that Eugenie was not a mother was just that, and that maybe she understood better than I thought. Maybe she understood better than me.

‘Why would she think that?’ I asked.

‘I don’t know,’ said Eugenie. ‘I don’t know what would make Lilith think that leaving Ruby-Mae would be best. But I can see why she’d want to leave her with you two.’

‘And even if all this is true,’ said Sean, ‘why wouldn’t she explain? Why wouldn’t she ask us?’

‘I can see why she wouldn’t have asked,’ Eugenie said. ‘You might have said no. Most people would. And if you did that now, I certainly wouldn’t blame you.’ She paused and put her hands flat in front of her on the table, gazing reflectively at them as if they held the answers. ‘But I don’t understand why there isn’t a letter. Some sort of explanation.’

We were all silent for a moment, wondering what that letter would have said.

‘This is all very well,’ said Sean, ‘but the question is what happens next. I’m thinking we should be filing a missing persons report or something with the police. Whatever has happened, we need to find Lilith and speak to her. We can help her with whatever she’s going through. Help her see that nothing is worth abandoning Ruby. Maybe it’s money. Maybe we can help her with money. But we need to find her. We need to go to the police.’

It seemed so obvious. It seemed as if that should have been my first step, and I felt wrong-footed.

‘But I don’t think we should do that before talking to a lawyer,’ said Sean. ‘That’s why I wanted Lerato.’

‘Why do we need a lawyer? Do you think they’ll think we murdered her?’ I asked.

Sean looked at me. ‘No, Rebecca. I’m worried that they might take Ruby-Mae away from us. Obviously, we don’t want that. We’ll find Lilith and sort this out, but in the meantime, Ruby is safest with us.’

My eyes filled with tears – not at the thought of losing Ruby-Mae (that would come), but at the fact that my husband hadn’t even questioned that Ruby-Mae should stay with us. Sean reached for my hand, and took it. He turned slightly and gave me a searching look.

‘Right?’ he said.

‘Right,’ I answered, squeezing his hand. ‘Right.’

As if summoned by our decision, my phone rang. I glanced at the screen and saw it was Lerato.

‘Talk of,’ I said, showing Sean.

I answered, and Lerato barely let me get through ‘hello’ before she started speaking. ‘Got your messages. Spoke to some peeps. On my way. Don’t call the police.’

‘Um, okay,’ I said. ‘Great.’

Lerato rung off before I had a chance to say anything more, and then Gugu appeared at the door. ‘The girls are ready to sleep,’ she said. ‘But they want you, Rebecca.’

‘Poor little things,’ said Sean. ‘They must be so confused.’ He turned to Gugu. ‘Thank you so much for everything, Gugu. I think you’d better go home – tomorrow will be another long day, I’m guessing.’

I felt a flush of love for Sean as I walked to Amy’s room, where two clean and pyjamaed children awaited me, both sitting on their beds holding their teddies. Ruby’s teddy was the one I had unpacked on the first day of her stay. Amy’s was one that Sean’s sister had brought the first day Amy was with us. It had actually been languishing at the bottom of her toy box for two years, but Ruby’s attachment to a teddy bear had triggered the idea in Amy’s head that she also needed one, and Susan’s present, among the many contenders, had won the coveted role.

‘Look, Becca,’ said Ruby. ‘All the toys been done come.’ She indicated a shelf, where Gugu had, amongst everything else, tidied away the toys that I’d flung around the room when I’d unpacked Ruby’s bag.

‘Yes,’ I said to Ruby. ‘I guess they missed you.’

It was the wrong thing to say.

‘I miss my mommy,’ said Ruby. She put her head down on her teddy’s.

I sat down next to her on the bed and put my arms around her, enveloping both child and toy. ‘I know, baby,’ I said. ‘We’re doing everything we can to figure out what’s going on here. But you’re safe, and we love you, and we can talk about how you are feeling any time you want.’

I felt Ruby’s head nod against my shoulder. ‘Ruby be’s a good girl.’

‘You’re always a good girl, sweetie,’ I said, kissing the little blonde head. ‘But if you need to cry or be sad, or even if you need to shout and be cross, that’s okay.’

‘Mommy,’ said Amy, from her perch on her own pillow, ‘can I also be cross? Can I growl like this?’ She made growly lion hands and emitted a sound that was half growl and half shriek. I was about to admonish her when I felt Ruby laughing against my chest.

‘That’s a scary growl,’ I said instead.

‘And I can growl like this,’ Amy carried on, making a small squeak.

Ruby laughed and pushed herself away from me.

I took the opening. ‘Let’s read a story,’ I said, grabbing a book from the pile next to the bed, and lying down in the middle of them, where the two single beds were pushed together. Both girls cuddled against me, and within a few minutes both were sound asleep.

I extricated myself from the tangle of children and made my way back to the others.

In the time I’d been with the girls, Lerato had arrived with takeaway pizzas, which were keeping warm in the oven. A bottle of wine was open, and Eugenie Clarke looked like she was installed on the couch for the rest of eternity. Lerato was next to her and they were leaning slightly towards each other, like tipsy, mismatched bookends. I found the sight of them oddly comforting.

Sean put a glass of wine in my hand and I sipped at it gratefully. Then Lerato fetched me a piece of pizza.

‘So?’ I said, sitting down with my food and drink. ‘Where are we?’

‘After I got your message, I phoned a friend,’ said Lerato. ‘An expert in family law. I’ve made an appointment for you to see her tomorrow.’

‘That seems a bit ... hasty,’ I said. ‘Lilith could still turn up.’

Eugenie nodded, but Lerato and Sean both shook their heads.

‘We need to make sure Ruby is safe until we find Lilith,’ said Sean. ‘When we find her, we’ll sort all this out. But Ruby mustn’t be put in a foster home – that would be a disaster. We need to make sure we keep her.’

When I spoke again, I felt as if each word had to be forced from somewhere deep inside me. ‘Sean, I think she’s tried to leave her before. But she’s always changed her mind. And she might change it again.’

Sean nodded. ‘Maybe,’ he said. ‘I’ve been wondering about that.’

‘And what if we can’t find her?’ I asked him. ‘What then?’

‘We’ll find her. People can’t just disappear. But, meantime, Ruby stays with us.’

I nodded and turned to Lerato. ‘Must we report Lilith’s disappearance to the police?’

‘Yes,’ said Lerato. ‘But Marilyn said you must first try find a private social worker.’

‘Clarissa,’ Sean and I said together.

Lerato looked nonplussed for a moment. ‘Marilyn thought that would be the hard part,’ she said.

‘Nope.’ I laughed at the absurdity. ‘We’ve pretty much got a private social worker on speed dial.’

‘Well then,’ said Lerato, ‘you need to speak to her, and if possible take her with you to the police. The police need to understand that Ruby-Mae is safe with you and doesn’t need to be taken to a place of safety.’

‘Would they do that?’ Eugenie was aghast.

‘Marilyn said it’s actually unlikely,’ Lerato replied. ‘That it’d probably just be too much trouble for them. But she also said you might get one policeman with his wits about him, and then you need to be able to show that the child is safe.’

‘Okay,’ I said. ‘So first thing tomorrow, we phone Clarissa. And then we go to the police. And then we see a lawyer.’ I sighed. ‘I still think this is some sort of misunderstanding. Maybe we should just wait a week.’

‘We can,’ said Sean. ‘But it won’t change. We may as well go tomorrow. First thing.’

An ice-cold wave of realisation hit, and I put down the wine glass I’d been nursing, despite it being long empty. I stared at it for a moment. I couldn’t believe I’d forgotten.

I hadn’t been pregnant for a day, and I was already drinking.

‘I can’t do it tomorrow,’ I said, my voice almost breaking. ‘I’ve got a gynae appointment.’

Sean looked at me. ‘For God’s sake, Rebecca, under the circumstances I think you can cancel it. This is a bit more important.’

‘No,’ I said, slowly lifting my head, my eyes locking with his. ‘No, this appointment is pretty important too.’ I paused, and swallowed. Never in my life had I imagined that I would give this news in these circumstances. ‘I’m pregnant, Sean,’ I said, and I started to cry.

