---
title: Friday
---

# Friday

The next morning ran like a military operation.

First, we took the girls to school. As planned, Sean distracted them, asking them to show him their favourite toys and where their drawings were on the walls, while I took Trish and Maureen aside and briefly explained the situation. Ruby seemed fine at that moment, but I knew things were likely to change.

‘My main aim, and hopefully yours,’ I said with an authority I didn’t feel, ‘is to make Ruby feel loved and safe. I’m pretty sure she’s going to act up if we can’t find Lilith soon, and I just want us to create a safe and holding environment for her when that happens.’

I expected them to argue with me, to pit their years of experience against my shadowy theory, but they both nodded in agreement.

‘Absolutely,’ said Trish. ‘The most important thing is that we give her a place of security.’

‘Yes,’ I said, somehow wishing someone had offered a more concrete plan of action.

Back in the car, with me having accomplished the first task of the morning, we needed to get going to make my gynae appointment on time (‘Of course I’m coming,’ Sean had said). But Sean – who was driving – was just staring into space.

‘Are you okay?’ I asked.

Sean shook his head slowly. ‘I actually don’t know,’ he said. ‘I just can’t believe it,’

I almost laughed. ‘Exactly which part can’t you believe?’ I asked.

‘The whole last forty-eight hours,’ he said.

I wanted to take a moment, to talk to him and share what we were feeling, but we just didn’t have time. ‘We’ll talk more, I promise,’ I said, squeezing his hand. ‘But right now, we’ve got to move.’

While Sean drove us to the gynae, I phoned Clarissa.

‘Rebecca,’ she said, ‘I’m so glad you phoned. I was about to phone you. It’s so —’

I interrupted her. ‘Clarissa, if you’ve got a baby for us, I don’t want to know. Everything has changed, and I can’t even think about that.’

‘I’m confused, Rebecca,’ said Clarissa. ‘You’ve kind of been driving me crazy for news.’

I sighed, and started telling the story I’d get so used to telling over the course of the day that my voice would become mechanical.

‘So we need you to come to the police with us,’ I ended. ‘So you can tell them that we’ll be a safe place for Ruby to stay.’

Clarissa was quiet for a moment. ‘Okay,’ she said. ‘When?’

‘I’m just going to the doctor, and then if it’s okay, we’ll pick you up and take you with us so we can strategise in the car.’

‘The doctor?’ said Clarissa. ‘Are you sick on top of it all?’

I hadn’t wanted to tell anyone; Sean, Lerato and Eugenie seemed enough for the moment. Too much, without my mom or my brother even knowing. But I sighed, realising that this pregnancy was not, in any way, going to be how I’d imagined it.

‘I’m pregnant,’ I told Clarissa. ‘We’re going for a scan. I found out yesterday.’

‘Oh wow, honey,’ said Clarissa. ‘Congratulations. That’s just the most wonderful news.’

A fizz of pride and happiness broke through all the worry. Clarissa was the first person who’d reacted with unmitigated happiness. So far, my announcement had not led so much to congratulations as to tears (Sean’s), and confusion and embarrassment (as Eugenie and Lerato almost squashed each other in their effort to leave Sean and me alone together).

‘You just pick me up when you’re done,’ Clarissa said.

***

I hadn’t really known what to expect from the scan that morning. I’d had what felt like a million scans before then, but they’d all been of my growing eggs or my empty uterus. And I’d seen friends’ mid-pregnancy scans of big baby-shaped blobs and close-ups that make one say, ‘How wonderful!’ even though you can’t make head or tail of the grey smudge proudly shoved under your nose.

I hadn’t realised how magical it would be.

When the scan showed a tiny bean in the space that used to be empty, and that bean had something bright and throbbing that the doctor said was its heart, I started to cry. And when Dr Stevenson turned up the volume on his machine, and we heard the baby’s heartbeat, Sean started to cry too. Not a manly shine of tears filling his eyes – he actually started to sob.

‘Sorry,’ he eventually said to Dr Stevenson.

‘Son,’ said Dr Stevenson, although he’s the same age as Sean, ‘I’ve seen it all in here.’

In the car afterwards, Sean turned to me and put his hand over my tummy. ‘I feel like I’m being disloyal to Amy by saying this,’ he said, ‘but I never realised it would feel like this.’

‘I think we’re going to have to get used to this experience being different from Amy, and try not to feel guilty about it,’ I said. Apparently, I was full of wisdom just then – I, the woman who’d actually forgotten she was pregnant the previous day.

Sean nodded. ‘So what you’re saying is, we mustn’t let feeling guilty ruin this magical thing?’

‘I guess that’s it. And we mustn’t let whatever’s going to happen with Ruby and Lilith spoil it either.’

I immediately regretted reminding him.

‘That might be harder,’ he said, taking his hand off my non-existent baby bump and starting the car. ‘Let’s get the first part over anyway.’

I hated Lilith in that moment. I hated her for ruining what should have been one of the most perfect things that could have happened to me. We should have been driving to tell my mom about the new baby; not to tell the police about Lilith. I hated her.

We picked up Clarissa. She made me get out of the car so she could look me up and down, and hug me.

‘This is just wonderful,’ she said. ‘A baby for Amy.’

Sean and I both smiled. Clarissa knew better than anyone how important it was for us to see this baby in the context of Amy.

‘Yes,’ said Sean. ‘A sister or brother for Amy.’ He paused, and then said something that again shifted my world. ‘For Amy, and maybe for Ruby too.’

Clarissa gave him a long look, her one hand resting on her hip. ‘You know what you’re saying, Sean?’

Sean nodded.

‘This isn’t something you can do lightly. This is different from Amy.’

‘I know,’ said Sean. ‘And we’re really going to try to find Lilith and help her. But I do know that children join families in all sorts of ways, and at least for now, Ruby has joined ours.’

‘Okay,’ said Clarissa. ‘Lucky Ruby to have found you two.’

We all climbed back into the car, and Clarissa directed us to a police station where she knew the station commander from a previous case they’d worked on together.

‘An ugly situation, that one,’ she said as we drove. ‘Nothing as pleasant as this.’ Then she giggled. ‘Insofar as you can call the unexpected disappearance of a grown woman abandoning her child “pleasant”.’

For some reason, all three of us found this very funny, and we had to take some deep breaths sitting in the car before we went into the station, for fear of looking like a group of drunks.

We needn’t have worried – the police station was a sobering place. We stood at the door taking it in.

There were three policemen manning the front desk, each busy with someone. Along the wall to the left of the door ran a bench, with people presumably waiting to be seen. At the far end, closest to the desk, was an elderly white man, his wrinkles almost indistinguishable from the stubble that covered his gaunt cheeks. He wore a knitted beanie, grey from dirt, pulled down over his forehead, and a coat that must have come from a person far larger than him. When he reached into his pocket, and pulled out what looked like a half-jack of whiskey, I saw that he had no teeth.

Beside him, leaning away, was a middle-aged woman with careful hair and make-up, her feet slightly swollen in too-tight pumps, which she kept firmly together. Her hands were clasped around her bag, which she held on her lap as she stared in front of her, as if to a better place.

On the bench beside her, inexplicably, lay a full-grown St Bernard, that appeared to belong to nobody. Even he looked depressed.

A voice from the desk carried over, the private-school accent coming from a well-dressed young man with incongruous dreadlocks, who was trying to give his statement. You could hear his voice becoming more and more strained, but you couldn’t make out the voice of the policeman.

‘He broke the window with a crowbar,’ the man was saying, slowly, allowing the policeman to write down his words. After what seemed like an inordinately long time, he said, ‘You’ve written that he brokened the window with a rock. He *broke* the window with a *crowbar*.’

A pause.

‘No. A crowbar is not the same as a rock. I’m the one who’s going to have to sign that drivel you’re writing. And answer for it in a court one day. Write “crowbar”.’

Everyone in the station seemed to hold their breath.

‘Very well,’ said the policeman, loud enough now that we could all hear him and learn. ‘I will start again.’ He held up the form, which was covered in writing, and slowly tore it in half.

I turned to Clarissa and Sean. ‘This is going to be a nightmare. Do we really have to do this?’

Just then, Clarissa broke away from us. ‘Nombi,’ she called, waving at a black woman whose face was framed by a halo of hair.

The woman glanced our way, and a smile grew across her wide face.

‘Clarissa Grant,’ she boomed in a deep voice. She elbowed a few of her colleagues out of the way as she made her way over to us, pausing only to mutter something at the police officer who’d just torn up the statement.

‘Drama,’ she said as she reached us. ‘These men always want to make a drama when the day is slow.’ She took Clarissa by the shoulders, and looked at her before pulling her into an embrace. ‘Clarissa Grant,’ she looked at Sean and me, ‘tell me you are not bringing me another terrible situation.’

‘It’s not wonderful,’ said Clarissa. ‘But it’s not terrible.’

‘Okay,’ said Nombi. ‘Come.’

She led us into the back, to what must have been her office. A piece of paper was Presticked to her door: ‘Brigadier Nomathemba Silonga’. I made a mental note – just because she was ‘Nombi’ to Clarissa didn’t mean that she was ‘Nombi’ to me. In my limited experience, police could be funny about these things.

Clarissa introduced us and then asked us to tell Nombi our story.

‘Brigadier Silonga,’ I started, ‘thank you for your time, and for allowing us to speak directly to you.’ I looked at her, and I could see that, while she probably would never admit it, I’d made the right call. Then I gave her a short rundown of my relationship with Lilith, what had happened, and where we were now, with Sean interrupting occasionally with a detail.

Nombi picked up a phone and asked someone to bring her a new docket to fill in.

‘So we’ll start with a missing person’s report, and see where it goes,’ said Nombi. ‘Do you have a photo?’

As I scrolled through my cellphone looking for a picture, a nervous-looking young man delivered a pile of blank files, and three pads of paper.

‘Overperforming,’ snapped Nombi.

‘Sorry, Brigadier,’ said the young man, almost whimpering as he backed out of the room.

Nombi looked at us. ‘Enormous potential, that one,’ she said, her smile making her cheeks dimple. ‘Love him like a son.’

I found a photo of Lilith – not a great one, but it would have to do. Nombi looked at it, and then emailed it to herself from my phone. I was a bit taken aback at the way she made herself at home with my device, though I had to admit it was probably more efficient that way.

She opened a file on her desk, and began to complete the form, asking me for details about us and about Lilith. I could answer some of it, but there was a lot of information I simply didn’t know: her car licence plate, who she banked with. I wouldn’t have even known her birthday, but could at least hand over a copy of Ruby’s birth certificate, which had her ID number on it. Nombi got as much information as she could out of me, and gave me a list of the information she still required. Then she turned to Clarissa.

‘I presume that your involvement is more than just getting these good people past the henchmen in the front?’

Clarissa laughed. ‘Indeed,’ she said. ‘That was simply a wonderful bonus.’

‘Best interests of the child?’ said Nombi, using a phrase that was to become the centrepiece of my vocabulary over the next few months.

‘Sean and Rebecca are without any doubt the best place for the child to be at this point, based on the facts I have,’ said Clarissa, suddenly speaking in a more formal voice. I was left in no doubt that she was now in professional mode. ‘I will visit the home this week,’ she continued, ‘and conduct a full assessment vis-à-vis the child.’

‘Conflict of interest?’ said Nombi, who didn’t seem to need full sentences or explanations in Clarissa’s company.

‘Purely professional relationship,’ said Clarissa. ‘The Princes adopted their daughter Amy through me, and have recently been in the process of starting a second adoption.’

‘Nice,’ said Nombi. It seemed that adopting had earned us some extra credit in her book. ‘I will try to prioritise this,’ she said, closing her file and picking up a red pen. She wrote a series of letters and numbers on it that I imagined contained a secret instruction to the effect that we were Clarissa’s VIPs. ‘Unfortunately,’ she continued, ‘people who want to disappear often can disappear. But we can put traces on her bank cards and put checks out for her licence plate. So please let me have all outstanding information as soon as possible.’

I nodded.

‘In the meantime,’ she said, ‘you probably need to talk to a lawyer about the child. Or if you don’t want her, Clarissa can arrange for her to be taken into a place of safety.’

Sean hadn’t spoken much, but he spoke now. ‘There’s no question of that, Brigadier,’ he said. ‘As long as Ruby needs a home, we will be there.’

By the time we got out of the police station, where the same people were still waiting in line, and even the dog had seemed to give us a resentful look for having jumped the queue, I felt exhausted. And there was still more.

‘What was with that dog?’ said Sean, as we all climbed into the car. ‘Do you think it doesn’t have a home?’

I leant my head back against the headrest. ‘Sean,’ I said, ‘you are the kindest and most embracing of men, and I have never been more grateful for that than today. But,’ I closed my eyes for a moment and took a deep breath, ‘you are not bringing home a St Bernard.’

Clarissa laughed from the back seat, but Sean was quiet, and I knew I’d probably been right.

We dropped off Clarissa at her office, and arranged a time for her to come and see Ruby later in the week – ‘Unless it all comes out in the wash, of course,’ she added.

We had an hour before we had to fetch the girls, and the appointment with the lawyer Lerato had found us was only in the afternoon.

‘Can we go by my folks?’ I said to Sean. ‘Can I just, for half an hour, be a woman telling her mother that she is pregnant?’

‘Of course,’ agreed Sean. I waited for him to say something about telling his parents, but he didn’t. ‘And I think we’d better tell her about Ruby too,’ he added.

I nodded. I had to keep remembering that thanks to Lilith, nothing would be the way I’d imagined it. ‘Yes, about Ruby too,’ I said.

On the way to my mom, I phoned Eugenie.

‘Just checking in. Any sign of Lilith?’ I didn’t really think there would be, but for some reason, Eugenie Clarke had become the person who calmed me.

‘No,’ she said. ‘But bloody hell wouldn’t you know in the middle of all this my bloody mother has gone and broken her hip, and I have to bloody fly to Port Elizabeth this evening.’

I was upset. I’d imagined that Eugenie would be the one to help us through this strange transition. I managed to express some sympathy and promised to keep in touch.

‘I’ll pop by the house and say bye to Ruby-Mae, if that’s okay,’ she said.

‘Sure,’ I agreed, buoyed at the thought of seeing her. But we couldn’t find a time when we’d be home that suited her, so I agreed that she could pop in when Gugu was with the girls.

‘I just don’t want her to feel abandoned by anyone else,’ said Eugenie and I was grateful that someone else was as invested in caring for Ruby as Sean and I were.

***

That afternoon, we saw the lawyer. When Lerato had given us the name – Marilyn Waxman – I had pictured a small woman. You’d think that my mental image would have been shaped around Marilyn Monroe, if anything, but it wasn’t. For some reason, I thought this lawyer would be small and dark and sharp-featured.

So I was a bit taken aback when a woman of about six foot two greeted us in the reception area of her small firm. She had the shoulders of an Olympic swimmer, and her high cheekbones were topped off with a blunt asymmetrical hairstyle that looked like it might be a wig, a pitch black that could only come from a bottle. She wore half-moon glasses, and had a bright-red mouth, the lipstick slightly overlapping the edges of her lips. To be honest, she looked like she might be transsexual. Her handshake was firm, but her voice was soft and light, an unexpectedly melodic tune from such a vast instrument.

As she ushered us into her office, I felt ambivalent: she didn’t seem like the hero who was going to help us.

By the time we left, I felt like I was a little bit in love.

‘Best interests of the child,’ she said in her little-girl voice once we’d told our story. ‘All that the courts want to know is what is in the best interests of the child. Yes,’ she said, steepling her long fingers, ‘it would be nice for us if this disappearing mother had left some sort of written instruction as to what she wanted to happen. But that’s a luxury. I don’t need it,’ she concluded with a wave of her hand, as if perhaps a lesser lawyer might need such assistance.

‘So what do we do?’ Sean asked.

‘So simple really,’ said Marilyn. ‘We’ll prepare an application to the Department of Social Development, which will be heard by the Children’s Court, to have you declared foster parents in the interim. Nobody’s going to oppose it, so there’ll be no problem, will there? It would be different if there was a father on the scene, but you say not?’

‘As I understand it, he doesn’t even know she exists,’ I said. ‘And I know very little about him. Certainly not enough to trace him, even if we wanted to.’

Even if I had known more, I would have said that. Lilith had been absolutely clear about what sort of man he was, and that he was not someone she wanted to have in Ruby’s life. She’d talked about it at that lunch, all those months ago.

I felt a chill run down my arms. Had Lilith been planning this for so long? Was that why she’d warned me about, what was his name, Ron? Warned me and Rose, both.

‘Something wrong?’ Marilyn looked at me with unexpectedly blue eyes.

‘No,’ I said. ‘Just very clear that the father is not in the picture.’

‘Great,’ she said. ‘The first step will then be that your social worker will place an ad in the newspaper calling on the biological father to come forward.’

I froze. The last thing I wanted was to find Ruby-Mae’s father. But Marilyn saw my reaction.

‘I wouldn’t worry,’ she said. ‘I’ve never actually seen the ad work. It’s a formality, but the reality is that very few people read the smalls. It’s not something you need to worry about. And indeed, it could help you find Lilith. Although again, doubtful.’ She smiled. ‘And after that, the order will be easy, especially with the social worker’s support.’

I started to thank her, but Sean interrupted.

‘And then,’ he said, ‘if we can’t find Lilith, does Ruby stay our foster child forever? Or can we do more?’

‘You could try to adopt her, if you want,’ Marilyn said in a matter-of-fact voice. ‘Slightly harder, bit more expensive, but not impossible. My advice would be that you give it a bit of time before you start that. The mother might still show up. But you can also send her to a place of safety or another foster home. You don’t have to keep her.’

‘But we can?’ said Sean. ‘We can make her our child?’

‘Yes,’ said Marilyn. ‘You can. Although if you don’t mind me saying so, it doesn’t sound like you need a piece of paper. It sounds like, in all the most important ways, she already is. Unless, of course, her mom comes back, which would be the best outcome.’

That’s when I started worrying for Sean. He was so invested in this. Bizarrely so, to be honest.

And I was starting to suspect that he didn’t really want us to find Lilith at all.

