---

---

Lilith had promised that she’d fetch Ruby-Mae at nine on the Sunday morning. By six, both girls were wide awake, watching TV and chatting. They seemed to be involved in a mild argument about Princess Sofia, which I couldn’t really follow, but they appeared to be enjoying themselves.

I sent Lilith a WhatsApp: ‘Girls awake, survived the night. Happy. See you at 9.’

Immediately after I sent the message there was a tick, showing that it had been sent but not received or read. At about 7.10am, I saw that there were two ticks and they were blue. Lilith had read it, and her status reflected, ‘last seen today at 7:02’.

I hadn’t planned anything for the morning, because we were expecting Lilith early. Sean eventually woke up at 8.30am, and when he came into the family room, rubbing his eyes and complaining about his broken night, both girls flung themselves at him.

‘Get dressed, Sean,’ I said. ‘Lilith will be here soon. You don’t want to scare her.’

Sean glanced down at himself. He was wearing a torn T-shirt and some sleep shorts that were so worn I didn’t think they’d survive another wash.

‘I look great,’ he said decisively.

‘Just get changed – she’ll be here soon,’ I said, my nerves slightly worn from the girls’ early start to the day.

He wondered back to the bedroom, mumbling. I heard the shower turn on, and knew it would be a while before we saw Sean again.

‘Where my Sean gone?’ said Ruby Mae.

‘Having a shower,’ I said.

‘Ruby also shower!’ she said in delight.

Amy looked amazed – showering, in her eyes, being a fate worse than death.

‘Okay, hang on,’ I stopped the conversation briskly. ‘No showering with Sean. How about we make *pancakes*?’ I reckoned that even if Lilith arrived while we were eating, she’d be happy to stay.

But 9am came and went, and Lilith didn’t appear.

I fed the girls, and dressed them, and we waited. Ruby-Mae was starting to get anxious. I distracted them with play dough and then I phoned Lilith. The phone rang, but she didn’t answer. I left a message.

At 10.30am Sean said he’d take the restless girls for a walk.

‘What if Lilith comes?’ I asked.

‘Then she can fucking wait,’ he said. ‘Try call her again while we’re out.’

I left another message. ‘Lilith, it’s Rebecca. I’m getting a bit worried about you. Please phone or text.’

After that message, I sat looking at my phone. I realised that I didn’t know where Lilith had actually gone, or any another phone number for her, or even the phone numbers or names of any of her other friends. All I knew was where she lived and I thought I knew where to find Mrs Clarke. If something had happened to Lilith, nobody would know how to contact me, and I wouldn’t know how to contact them. My chest felt tight, but I reminded myself that not everyone felt as strongly about punctuality as I do. Another part of my brain was telling me that Lilith would never leave Ruby-Mae for a minute more than she had to, and that something must be wrong.

I thought that Sean would reassure me when he came home, but he was equally worried.

‘I’ll watch a DVD with the kids’ he said. ‘You go to her place and see if she’s there. Maybe speak to that sex woman.’

‘Okay,’ I said, looking at my watch. It was 12.10am. Lilith was over three hours late. I didn’t know if we were being ridiculous, but I kept thinking that she would never willingly leave Ruby-Mae for so long.

I helped the girls choose a DVD, and Ruby-Mae announced that she needed her teddy. We rooted around in her bag, where we found three teddies, and Ruby-Mae spent some happy moments choosing which one she wanted to take to watch the movie.

I hunted for my car keys and my sunglasses. The green light on my phone was flashing, so I checked my messages. There was a WhatsApp from Lilith: ‘Sorry. On my way!!! Xxx’

I almost started crying with relief. It was like that day at the park all over again, only this time I was much, much angrier.

‘She’s on her way,’ I yelled to Sean, then realised I sounded hysterical. That I *was* hysterical. ‘Your mom will be here soon, sweetie,’ I told Ruby-Mae.

‘What’s her story?’ asked Sean.

‘No idea. But believe me, I intend to find out,’ I said.

‘Mommy’s cross,’ Amy said matter-of-factly to Ruby-Mae.

Twenty minutes later, Lilith arrived full of apologies.

‘I know you’re furious,’ she said as soon as she got out of the car. ‘It’s unforgivable.’

Before I could say anything, Ruby-Mae came barrelling towards her mother. ‘Mommy!’

Lilith bent down and opened her arms. ‘Come for love, Ruby-Mae,’ she said, her voice catching slightly. ‘Mommy’s missed you so much.’

‘I went to the zoo!’ Ruby-Mae exclaimed, then stopped and looked sad. ‘But not my Sean.’

Lilith looked up at me, her eyes red. ‘Sounds like we have a bit of a crush going on here,’ she said with a smile.

But I wasn’t going to let things go that easily. ‘We’ve been really worried, Lilith,’ I said. ‘Where were you?’

‘It ended so late,’ Lilith said, straightening up from her embrace with Ruby-Mae, but keeping one hand on her daughter’s shoulder. ‘I had a bit too much to d-r-i-n-k, and I must have overslept. It was nine when I woke up, and I got here as fast as I could. There was a huge accident on the road though.’

‘Why didn’t you phone? Or message?’ I asked.

‘I thought I would on the road,’ she said. ‘And then the next time I looked, the battery was dead.’ She pulled her phone out of the large handbag she’d slung over her shoulder, and waved it to me so I could see the blank screen.

‘Lilith,’ I said, ‘I was really worried. What would I have done if something had happened to you? I don’t know enough about you or how to contact you.’

Sean had come outside now, with a thundery-looking Amy in tow.

‘I’m sorry,’ said Lilith, sounding on the verge of tears. ‘Next time I’ll leave all the information you need.’

I was stunned by the words ‘next time’. For a start, I’d never imagined that this was anything more than a once-off, especially knowing what a possessive parent Lilith was. And more to the point, I certainly wasn’t going to be put through this again. I was about to say as much when Sean stepped over, and put his hand in the small of my back.

‘That would be great,’ he said to Lilith. ‘We loved having Ruby-Mae with us, and she’s always welcome. But you really scared us. I’m sure you can understand that.’

When Lilith and Ruby-Mae finally left, after much hugging and kissing, I asked Sean why he’d stepped in.

‘I never want to do that again,’ I said.

‘Ruby-Mae was no real trouble, was she?’ he asked. Before I could answer, he carried on. ‘You can see how a mother alone might need a break every now and then. And you said she doesn’t have much of a support system.’ He paused. ‘Do I sound lame if I say that I think Ruby-Mae needs to spend a bit more time with men? With someone like me, who can be a father figure?’

‘You want to be a father figure to Ruby-Mae?’ I wasn’t sure whether to laugh, or cry, or give Sean an enormous kiss.

‘Not a father,’ he said, blushing. ‘But maybe like an uncle. She’s a sweet little girl. I think we can enrich her life.’

Put like that, it would have been small-minded of me to argue. It was only later that night, as I lay awake next to a softly snoring Sean, that it struck me.

‘She read the message at 7am,’ I said softly. ‘If she read the message then, she was awake at 7am. She didn’t oversleep. And then she sent a message after the battery was meant to be dead.’ I knew that there could be many explanations, but the ticks on WhatsApp didn’t add up. It was a long time before I fell asleep.

