---

---

I didn’t feel like a person with options five days later, when I found out I wasn’t pregnant. I felt like a person who’d hit a brick wall. I couldn’t even cry.

The bleeding started on day thirteen. It shouldn’t even be possible to bleed that early, with all the hormones you take. But it did. I tried to convince myself that it was implant bleeding, but it was too late and too heavy, and eventually I had to recognise that it was a period. We didn’t even bother with the pregnancy test – I just went to Dr Stevenson and told him about the blood. I think part of me was still hoping that he’d insist on a pregnancy test because of some lesser-known pregnancy side effect. But he didn’t.

‘We can try again,’ he said. ‘Maybe another laproscope and then another cycle?’ He reached out and touched my hand. ‘Rebecca, there’s no reason why you shouldn’t get pregnant. You just need to keep trying.’

I withdrew my hand. ‘So you keep saying,’ I said. ‘So you’ve said for years. But we both know that’s crap. I’m not going to get pregnant, and you’re going to get rich.’ I paused. ‘Richer.’

I got up and walked to the door.

‘Goodbye, Dr Stevenson,’ I said. ‘I’m done.’

Of course, I felt bad about it later. It wasn’t Dr Stevenson’s fault that I couldn’t get pregnant. To use an overused phrase – it was what it was. I sent Dr Stevenson an email apologising, and he came back saying that he was ready to start again whenever I wanted to. But I knew that I was done.

I felt flat. I couldn’t seem to work up any grief or disappointment, or even relief. Sean’s reaction was also strange. He was overwhelmingly cheerful and optimistic, and kept saying things like, ‘Okay, we tried. That’s done and now we can adopt again,’ and, ‘Adoption is what we know, anyhow,’ and, ‘Family cohesion is all that matters.’ Actually, I had no idea what that last one even meant, and he said it about once a day, but I just nodded and agreed. But I didn’t phone the social worker, or do anything to hasten the adoption process. In fact, all I did was sit around drinking cups of tea and staring at the wall.

Amy knew I wasn’t right. She’d come over to me and stroke my head. Once, she said, ‘Mommy? Where are you?’

‘I’m here, baby,’ I said.

‘No, not here.’ She shook her head emphatically and I waited for some new insight from my tiny oracle. But then she said, ‘Can Ruby come play?’

I laughed for the first time in days and agreed that yes, Ruby was just the answer. I phoned Lilith and she sounded tired when she answered, but said they could come right over.

‘It’s a good idea,’ she said. ‘Perk us all up.’

When Lilith arrived I could see that she wasn’t exaggerating – she *did* need perking up. She looked thinner than usual and pale, with large blue bags under her eyes.

‘Are you okay?’ I asked, giving her a hug.

She smiled. ‘I was about to ask you the same.’

‘I’ll make you a deal,’ I said. ‘I’ll tell you the truth if you tell me the truth.’

‘O-k-a-y,’ she said, sounding wary.

‘I’m shit,’ I said. ‘I am absolutely terrible, and can barely get out of bed. I didn’t even want to try to get pregnant, and now that I can’t, I’m devastated. It makes no sense. I make no sense.’

‘I don’t think things are meant to make sense,’ said Lilith, speaking slowly. ‘I think if we try to make sense of our lives and our challenges, there lies the path to madness.’

‘You might be right,’ I said. ‘But I still feel like shit.’

Lilith laughed. ‘I think you’re allowed that. Can I make you a cup of tea?’

I nearly got sidetracked – Lilith had such a way of doing that to me – but this time I managed to stay focused. ‘Your turn,’ I said, ignoring the talk of tea. ‘What’s going on?’

Lilith sighed. ‘Oh, I’ve just had a virus that I can’t shake. I feel tired and sick and, quite frankly, Ruby-Mae is exhausting me.’

At this point, Ruby-Mae was chasing Amy around our garden, both of them shrieking at the top of their voices. I could see that she’d be exhausting in a small flat if you weren’t feeling well.

‘You should have said so,’ I said. ‘I’m so sorry – I didn’t realise you were ill.’

‘Oh, I’m sure it’ll pass. I just need some rest.’

‘I’ve got an idea,’ I said. ‘Go and sleep now. I’ll look after the girls. You can even sleep here, in the guest room.’

I hadn’t really expected her to agree to that bit. I thought she might leave Ruby-Mae and go home for a nap.

‘Could I?’ she said.

‘Sure.’

I showed her the room, and brought her a cup of tea. ‘Sleep as long as you need to,’ I said, pulling the door closed behind me.

I spent the afternoon playing with the girls. Strangely, it was easier sometimes with two, and I actually enjoyed myself. I felt better than I had for ages, and was grateful to Lilith for giving me that chance. At about six, I peeped into the spare room and Lilith was still fast asleep, the tea cold next to her bed.

I fed the girls and bathed them, putting Ruby-Mae into a spare set of Amy’s pyjamas. Sean came home, and I explained the situation to him. I expected him to be irritated, but he was sympathetic.

‘It must be hard when you’re on your own,’ he said. He read to both girls, and Ruby-Mae was delighted. Eventually, she fell asleep leaning against Sean, Amy on the other side. I picked her up and put her into bed next to Lilith, who was still asleep.

Sean and I were a bit unsure of what to do – we didn’t mind Lilith spending the night, but we were worried that she’d wake up in the dark and panic. I settled for putting a note next to the bed, explaining that the burglar alarm was on but wasn’t armed in the toilet or kitchen, in case she needed anything.

I didn’t sleep well, and checked on her several times during the night. The last time I checked, her arms were wrapped around Ruby-Mae and I could have sworn there were small smiles on both faces; mirror images of each other.

I must have finally fallen asleep, because when I woke up, Sean had already left for work and the house smelt of coffee and frying bacon. I found the girls watching TV, wrapped up in a shared blanket on the couch and eating bacon sandwiches. In the kitchen, Lilith was cooking more bacon, and eggs.

‘Oh no,’ she said when she saw me. ‘I wanted to bring you breakfast in bed.’

‘Oh,’ was all I managed. I was a bit thrown by her wholesale ownership of my kitchen.

‘I hope you don’t mind,’ she said, waving a spatula. ‘Sean showed me where everything was, and I really wanted to find some way to thank you.’

‘It was nothing.’ I accepted the cup of coffee Lilith handed me.

‘It wasn’t nothing,’ she said, her back to me as she started dishing up a plate of breakfast. ‘It was everything. I feel so much better. You did that for me.’

She put the plate of food on the table and went to the kettle to pour herself some tea.

‘Anyone would have done the same,’ I said, sitting down. ‘But I’m glad you feel better.’

Lilith sat across from me, cradling her tea. ‘Anyone *might* have done the same, although I’m not even sure of that,’ she said, ‘but you’re the only one who makes me feel totally safe. I knew you’d look after Ruby-Mae perfectly, so I could let go.’

I didn’t really know what to say, so instead I started eating. ‘Thank you,’ I said, after the first mouthful. ‘This is delicious. Aren’t you having anything?’

‘I can’t really eat in the morning,’ she said with a small shrug. ‘But I enjoyed cooking for you.’

I heard a shout of laughter from the lounge, and Amy yelled, ‘Princess!’ I felt a wave of well-being wash over me.

I smiled and raised my cup of coffee in a toast. ‘We should do this more often,’ I joked.

Lilith laughed. ‘Don’t tempt me,’ she said.

I sipped my coffee and put it down. ‘Lilith, you can ask me for help whenever you need it. Don’t shut your friends out.’

Lilith’s neck flushed and her eyes seemed to tear up. ‘Thanks,’ she said. ‘That means a lot to me.’

For a moment I thought she was going to say more. She looked at me, and I was sure she was about to tell me something important. But when she eventually spoke, she said, ‘More coffee?’ and the moment passed.

\*\*\*

Lilith’s stay had changed something for me, and I made contact with our social worker, Clarissa Grant, a day or two later.

Clarissa seemed pleased to hear from me. We’d become close during Amy’s adoption in the sense that we’d spoken on the phone most days, and she’d seemed to really care that we got a baby and that it all happened as quickly as possible. I always presumed that this is how she was with all her clients, which was why she’s one of the most popular private social workers in the adoption field. That, and the fact that she worked for the state for many years, so has excellent contacts within the system. I hadn’t expected her to forget me, but at the same time I didn’t think the details of my life would be at her fingertips.

‘Hi Clarissa, it’s Rebecca Prince here,’ I started.

‘Rebecca!’ she said. ‘How are you? And Sean? And dear little Amy? I think of you so often.’

I’d forgotten Clarissa’s habit of asking so many questions in a row that you didn’t know what to answer first. I could imagine her surrounded by Post-it notes stuck to bits of paper, a chaos that belied her obvious organisation.

‘We’re all good, Clarissa,’ I said. ‘How are you?’

‘Oh, excellent, excellent,’ said Clarissa. ‘Busy, busy you know. So many babies, so many parents. And Amy must be nearly three now? Already three? She must be a lovely girl.’

‘Yes,’ I said. ‘Just turned three, and very lovely.’ I decided that as much as I loved Clarissa, I wasn’t going to tell a social worker that I didn’t find Amy lovely twenty-four seven.

‘And I imagine that you’re ready for another babe now?’ said Clarissa, getting straight to business.

‘Yes, I think we are,’ I said. Again, no need to burden her with our brief dalliance with fertility treatment again, unless she asked.

‘Lovely, lovely,’ she said. I heard paper rustling in the background. ‘Should I come round next Friday at ten, and we can go through the process and update your records, and I can have a little visit with Amy too? Always so lovely to see one of my babies growing up.’

I agreed, a bit unclear as to whether seeing Amy was actually part of the assessment for the next adoption, or just something Clarissa wanted to do.

I phoned Sean and told him that I’d set up the meeting.

‘Good for you, Rebecca,’ he said. ‘I know this has been a hard road.’

‘No harder than before,’ I said. ‘Strictly speaking, easier.’ Then I told him about what Clarissa had said about meeting Amy. ‘What if Amy doesn’t measure up?’ I said. ‘What if we’ve done such a bad job that we can’t get another baby?’

Sean laughed. ‘Amy’s magnificent. If she’s the test that we have to pass, they’re going to be throwing babies at us. Begging us to take more. Leaving them on our doorstep.’

I couldn’t help smiling, as he’d intended. ‘You think?’

‘I know,’ he answered. ‘Rebecca, we’ve done good with Amy. I know she tests you sometimes, but that’s because she’s a happy, healthy and self-confident three year old. Being monstrous is part of that.’

Just then, I heard a crash and Amy’s voice saying, ‘Uh-oh.’

‘Gotta run,’ I said to Sean. ‘Sounds like she’s exercising her happy confidence right this second.’

‘Love you,’ said Sean. ‘And I’m excited.’

‘Me too.’

And I was. Lilith had been right. I was a person with options.

