---
title: The key
---

# The key

We’d run out of milk and bread so I took the girls for a walk to the local shop. It was probably stupid of me, but I’d felt my exhaustion lifting, and I wanted to make the most of the sunny afternoon. It was slightly further away than really suited the girls’ short legs though, and Amy began complaining bitterly when we were about a hundred metres from the shop. Ruby followed suit and collapsed theatrically on the ground. I had to half drag them the rest of the way, muttering part encouragement and part mild obscenities. At the entrance to the shop, unsure of how I was going to manoeuvre two reluctant toddlers to the milk and bread sections, I even considered turning back.

‘If you behave,’ I said, ‘I’ll buy you each a chocolate to eat on the way home.’

I looked up and noticed one of the tellers staring at me. She whispered something to the customer with her, who turned to stare at us too. Honestly, I thought, have they never seen a mother bribing her children before?

Now on best behaviour for their promised chocolates, the girls walked hand in hand with me towards the bakery section at the back. Behind us, one of the tellers made a loud comment in Zulu, which I couldn’t understand, but suddenly I noticed that a number of people were looking at us. I couldn’t understand it, so I lifted my chin and walked on.

We got the bread and the milk, and then the girls spent some time choosing which chocolate they wanted. Usually I would have got impatient, but that day I was happy to give the tellers a bit of time to get over the terrible trauma of witnessing my parenting skills. I shook my head, trying to dislodge the paranoia.

Eventually the girls each chose chocolate: Amy a green Aero and Ruby, inexplicably, a small Chomp. I pointed out that she could have a full-sized chomp, but she was adamant. When we got to the queue at the tellers, it felt like all their heads jerked towards us, and I told myself to get a grip.

We were standing behind a woman who was so thin that her clothes hung on her. Her hair was lank, and she smelt slightly. I glanced at her shopping, and saw it was mostly chocolates, wine and cigarettes, and in her hand she held the latest issue of *About!*, the weekly tabloid magazine you find in every doctor’s waiting room across the country. I don’t ever buy it but I do have a secret fascination, so I glanced at the cover.

At first glance, I thought it was a picture of some celebrity with her two children, each holding a hand. The photo was blurred, like the subjects hadn’t known it was being taken. The one child was white and the other black, so I looked a bit closer, shuffling nearer to do so.

The woman wasn’t Angelina Jolie, although for a moment, I thought that she looked vaguely familiar.

And then I realised: she was me. And the children were Ruby and Amy.

I left my place in the queue, telling the girls to stay and watch the basket, and grabbed my own copy of the magazine off the rack. As well as the full-cover picture of me looking furtive with the girls was an insert photo of Ron Buckley. *Father’s heartbreak*, said the headline across the bottom of the cover. *I didn’t even know I had her and now strangers won’t share her*, it said underneath. Ron had been photographed in such a way that he looked both devastatingly handsome and absolutely miserable. I paid for the shopping and the magazine as if I was hypnotised.

‘This is you,’ said the teller, stabbing at the cover of the magazine.

‘Yes,’ I agreed, my voice coming from far away.

The teller looked again and then pointed at Amy. ‘You must give her back,’ she said.

‘No, it’s ...’ I started to explain. But there was no point. ‘Mind your own fucking business.’

The teller was silent as we finished the transaction, and I wondered if I’d ever be able to walk into this shop again.

I almost ran us home, holding hands with the girls, who were each also holding their melting chocolates. The plastic bag with the bread, milk and magazine hung cutting into my wrist as I half-dragged my children over loose gravel and stones, miraculously keeping them upright, desperate to get them behind the safety of our high wall.

As soon as I in the front door, I read the article: a four-page feature filled with photographs of me, my children and Ron. There was the photograph of Lilith that I’d used on the funeral pamphlet and there was even a photograph of Eugenie with the title, *Sex Industry Madam plays questionable role*. The gist of the article was that poor Ron had been tricked by his unfeeling ex-girlfriend and hadn’t even known that he was a father. And now, in the wake of the girlfriend’s death ‘under mysterious circumstances’, two ‘strangers’ wouldn’t even let him meet his ‘long-lost daughter’. The article went on: *World-renowned artist Rebecca Williams and husband Sean Prince have the money and power to fight for little Ruby-Mae, while destitute father Ron Buckley is unable to pay his rent, let alone the expensive legal fees that would be necessary to assert his rights*. And it ended with the kicker: details of a bank account into which readers could deposit money to ‘Help Ron Fight for his Baby’.

I read the article twice, unable to believe what I was seeing. What scared me was the level of detail about the situation, things Ron certainly wouldn’t have known, like where Lilith had worked and where Ruby-Mae went to crèche before she had changed schools. It had some details about what had happened after Lilith left Ruby-Mae with us – that we had gone to the police and eventually discovered her death – but written carefully, so that none of it expressed our worry and heartbreak. Somehow, it just made us seem careless, the sort of people who lose friends. The very worst was that they knew about my pregnancy, and managed to write about it in such a way that it sounded like I had faked my infertility for some unmentioned nefarious purpose. I had told so few people about the pregnancy, I just couldn’t understand how the writer of the article knew about it. The article simply said, ‘According to sources close to the Princes’. I shivered.

I phoned Sean when I was finished reading.

‘I just saw it,’ he said as he answered. ‘Adam’s wife bought a copy and he brought it in.’

‘What do we do?’ I asked. ‘How is this happening?’

‘I don’t know,’ said Sean. ‘But I’m making an appointment with Marilyn right now.’

Sean rang off and I went back to examining the article. The thing that confused me the most – besides the mention of my pregnancy – was the photographs. The cover photo had been snapped without me realising, and the background was removed so I had no idea where it was. But there were more photographs in the article – one of me laughing, with the caption, *Rebecca Williams refuses access*, and another of Ruby-Mae looking bereft, with the caption, *Will she ever meet her dad?* In both those photographs there was a bit of background, which seemed to be mostly grass. In the picture of Ruby, there was something red and plasticky looking in one corner.

Suddenly, the penny dropped: these pictures had been taken in the park.

There was also a photograph of the funeral with the casket at the front of the church. The caption read, *Little Ruby-Mae was not allowed to attend her own mother’s funeral*.

I cast my mind back and remembered the people I’d seen as I stood at the pulpit. Rose, looking like the widow of a mafia Godfather. The man who I now realised was Ron Buckley. And the mousey young woman I’d suspected of taking photos.

And who’d been standing next to Rose.

I turned back to the photographs of me and Ruby taken at the park. The photographs that must have been taken by one of the three of us; one of my park friends. Lilith was dead, and I hadn’t taken those photographs, so that left Rose. Rose, who was always snapping ‘action’ pictures of all of us in the park.

Rose, whose pictures used to make me laugh.

Rose. Rose and Ron Buckley. I felt sick.

My phone rang – Sean. ‘I called Marilyn,’ he said. ‘She was about to call us. She’s had an urgent application for access served on her offices and she says we need to come in and see her. He’s not asking for custody yet, but he wants access.’ Sean paused. ‘Rebecca,’ he said, ‘she says he’ll probably get it.’

‘But we have the will now,’ I said. ‘Surely that counts for something?’

‘It’s all about Ruby’s best interests,’ said Sean. ‘And apparently having a relationship with an abusive, unemployed man she has never met will be in her best interests.’

***

And that’s what Marilyn also told us that afternoon. The hearing was set down for the next Tuesday and, barring a miracle, Ron would be granted some sort of access.

‘We’ll try to fight it,’ said Marilyn. ‘And in the alternative we’ll push for supervised access with Clarissa, in your home.’

‘In our home,’ I repeated. The idea of Ron poisoning my space made me feel sick. ‘What about Amy?’

‘One of you would take her out for that time.’

Then we asked her about the magazine article.

‘There are several ways you can handle it,’ she said. ‘You can make a big fuss and threaten to sue and even try to sue. It’ll go nowhere – defamation is a tough case to prove in this country, and I don’t think there is anything in this article that is factually untrue. *About!* has very clever lawyers in that respect. We could, however, take issue with the fact that you weren’t given a chance to comment, and ask for your side to be expressed.’

‘And have another tacky article about us?’

Marilyn nodded. ‘Exactly the problem.’ She pushed her glasses up her nose. ‘I think the best thing we can do with this is use it for our case. We’ll refer to it in the court papers as illustration of the type of person Buckley is, and his unsuitability. We’ll make the case that no one putting his child’s interests first would have done this.’

Sean rubbed his neck. ‘He’ll say he had to get the money to fight us.’

‘Yes,’ said Marilyn, ‘he probably will.’

‘So in summary,’ I said, ‘anyone can publish anything about us, and Ron Buckley has rights that we can’t fight.’

‘You can fight,’ said Marilyn, her singsong voice gentle given how aggressively I’d spoken. ‘You can make it hard for him, you can make it expensive for him, and you can stop him from getting full custody.’

She took her glasses off and put them next to the file.

‘Most of these cases are not won in the court,’ she said. ‘Ron Buckley doesn’t really want Ruby-Mae and all the related expenses. He wants something else. He might like the attention. He might think there’s money in it. The real trick here is to figure out what’s feeding this, and find a way to either give it to him, or to stop him from getting the attention he wants. In the meantime, I think we should also start adoption proceedings.’ She smiled weakly. ‘And if we can find the key to this case, you use it to get him to sign the papers and give up his rights.’

‘You seem to be telling us to threaten him?’ said Sean.

Marilyn put her glasses back on. ‘I wouldn’t be a very good lawyer if I was telling you to do that,’ she said, pretending to be fascinated by something in her papers.

***

It played out much as Marilyn had said it would.

We filed affidavits and set out a case for why Ron wasn’t a suitable influence for Ruby-Mae. When I read through our case, I was sure we would win – it was so obvious. But Ron now had a smart attorney – paid for no doubt with the money he’d milked out of gullible *About!* readers who believed they were doing good.

And when it came to court, Ron was wearing an expensive dark-grey suit with a light-blue shirt that brought out the colour of his eyes. He’d had a haircut and the match had gone from between his lips. He must have been carefully coached, because even his characteristic slouch had gone, and when his case was presented, his eyes filled with tears, which he somehow managed to draw attention to while at the same time looking like he was manfully holding them back.

When Marilyn presented our case, the magistrate was scathing. The evidence of abuse that Eugenie and I had sworn to on affidavit was dismissed as hearsay.

‘In any event, Ms Waxman,’ said the magistrate, ‘you know full well that even if he beat the mother black and blue, that doesn’t mean he’ll hurt the child.’

He was a man this time. When we’d first seen him, I was glad – at least Ron’s striking looks wouldn’t play a part. But the down side was that he seemed very supportive of the rights of fathers, and I wondered if this might be personal.

In the end though, he obviously did give the evidence of abuse some weight – or so Marilyn told us – because he ordered that Ron could spend two afternoons a week visiting Ruby-Mae at our house or at Clarissa’s rooms, and that Clarissa would supervise all visits. The cost of Clarissa’s supervision would be paid half by Ron and half by us. Marilyn questioned this, but the magistrate raised his unruly eyebrows and said, ‘Would you prefer unsupervised, Ms Waxman?’ And we were all to return to court after three months, when Clarissa would submit her report.

We felt defeated when we left the court.

‘It’s as good as we could have expected,’ said Marilyn. ‘Three months, twice a week, is a big commitment. My guess is that Ron’s going to get bored of it.’

‘What if the opposite happens?’ said Sean. ‘What if he falls in love with Ruby like I ... like we have?’

Marilyn looked at him. ‘Sean, if that happens, would it really be so bad for Ruby-Mae to have her biological father in her life?’

‘An abusive man who abandoned her mother?’

‘Her mother left him with no forwarding address. He didn’t even know she was pregnant.’ Marilyn looked from one of us to the other. ‘I know this isn’t what you want to hear, especially from me. But I’m trying to show you the objective facts here. Buckley is a creepy man, but if you allow yourself to, you can see his side.’

At home, Sean and I talked about changing lawyers.

‘She’s not on our side,’ said Sean, and it certainly felt that way. But when we talked to Lerato, she pointed out that Marilyn’s job was to tell us the legal truth.

‘You might not like it,’ she said. ‘Hell, Marilyn might not like it. But a good lawyer gives you the full picture.’

