---

---

I was energised by setting up the appointment with Clarissa, and this showed in so many ways. In the first place, I decided that it was time for Amy to start at nursery school. I contacted all the schools in our immediate area, and made appointments with those that had space, or thought they might have space in the near future. I didn’t know how long the adoption process was going to take this time, and I wanted to be ready to look after a new baby. At the same time, I wanted to establish Amy at school before that, so that she didn’t feel ousted by the new arrival. I felt confident, like all my mothering synapses were firing on full blast.

The first two schools drained that confidence. At the first one, which was in a private home with all sorts of outbuildings, I was greeted by a girl who was nineteen at the most. She had greasy hair and a rash of spots around a lip piercing.

‘I’ve got an appointment with Anne?’ I said, hoping this wasn’t Anne.

‘S’my mom,’ said the girl. ‘S’out. I’ll show you ’round.’

She stood and looked at me, and I waited a few moments. I thought about simply turning around, but eventually I said, ‘Well, I guess you’d better.’

‘’Kay,’ said Greasy Hair, as if she knew as well as I did that I would not be choosing this school. She opened a security gate, which we walked through. She locked it behind her.

‘Security’s important,’ she said in an absolute monotone. Then she opened a door to the left. ‘Babies in here.’

I glanced in. An old black woman dozed in a corner, while two small babies lay on their backs in cots, staring at the ceiling. A slightly older child was batting a ball around the floor. I felt sick.

We walked down a passage, and she opened a door to the right. ‘Three year olds in here.’

Inside there was another childminder – this one, at least, awake. On her lap was a little girl about Amy’s age, with her thumb in her mouth, and a river of snot from her nose to her lip. Two boys sat on a faded mat, playing with a small collection of Lego.

‘Only three of them?’ I asked.

Greasy Hair scratched her elbow. ‘I think there’s more outside.’

‘With a teacher?’ I asked hopefully.

Greasy Hair looked at me. ‘A teacher? What ya gonna teach a three year old?’ She laughed. ‘Like, maths? Nah – the girls can watch them.’

‘The *girls*?’ My voice was faint to my ears.

Greasy Hair pointed at the childminder, who looked wearily at me.

‘Where’s your mother?’ I asked Greasy Hair. ‘Isn’t she supposed to be in charge?’

‘Ag, ja, but the kids make her tired,’ said Greasy Hair. ‘She goes out.’

I almost ran out of the place, and spent several hours thinking that maybe I should report the school to someone. But when I spoke to Lilith, she said she’d seen a lot like that, and at least someone was watching the kids.

‘I’m not saying send Amy there,’ she said. ‘It sounds dreadful. But I’m just saying that it’s not the worst, and it’s the best some families can afford.’

The next school that I looked at was the opposite.

‘I don’t take more than ten children,’ said a woman called Hazel as soon as she’d met me at the gate. ‘I have a waiting list, you know, but you sounded like the right sort of person. I’ll show you around and then we’ll see from there.’

She glanced at Amy, who was with me this time. ‘It’s a wonderful thing you’ve done, adopting her. She’s lucky,’ she said.

I cringed. This sort of observation, made so often and no doubt with good intentions, makes all my hairs stand up. Can’t people see that I’m the lucky one?

Hazel led us into her school, which was a converted building at the back of her large property.

‘Lots of schools claim to be Montessori,’ she said. ‘But they’re not the real thing. I’m the real thing. I know that’s important to you.’

Actually, I had no strong feelings about Montessori one way or another, but Hazel seemed better than Greasy Hair so far, so I nodded, as if this was my main concern. Apparently this was not enough, as Hazel eyed me for a response.

‘Yes,’ I said, and we were allowed to move on.

Hazel then gave me an item-by-item tour of the large play area.

‘Locks and keys,’ she said, pointing at a shelf. ‘Fine Motor. Bricks.’ Pointing to another shelf. ‘Gross motor.’ And so on, through every item in the room.

‘As you will know,’ she said speculatively, as if she knew I did not know, ‘with Montessori, we give children choice. They spend the day on the activity they need that day.’

‘Oh,’ I said. ‘In that case, Amy might spend all day every day playing make-believe.’

Hazel pursed her well-glossed lips. ‘We do not encourage making things up,’ she said. ‘You mustn’t worry. We’ll sort that out here.’ The way she said ‘sort that out’ made me wilt, but I kept picturing the other school, and this was better.

‘Where are the jungle gyms?’ I asked, trying to change the subject.

Hazel’s eyes opened wider, although her expression remained neutral enough that I suspected Botox. ‘Jungle gyms are very, very dangerous,’ she said. ‘Do you know that nine out of eleven playground accidents occur on jungle gyms?’

‘Nine out of eleven?’ I asked, because that sounded like a most unlikely statistic. But Hazel took my response as shared horror. ‘Exactly,’ she said. ‘Jungle gyms are almost as bad for children as additives.’ She paused. ‘We ask our mothers to only send wholewheat nut- and gluten-free bread sandwiches. And water. Juice,’ Hazel’s voice became shrill, ‘juice is absolutely the worst thing a child can drink.’

I pictured what Amy would rather be doing right now: watching cartoons, drinking a juice and eating Flings.

‘I don’t think this is going to work,’ I said to Hazel.

She looked me up and down. ‘Probably not,’ she agreed.

I was starting to wonder if I needed to home school Amy, but we still had one more school on the list. This school was only two blocks away from our house and I decided to take Amy along for the walk so that the day wasn’t completely wasted.

We stopped at number 109 to do a post swap on the way.

Our house is number 106, and we suspect that the postman is a little bit dyslexic, because our post often ends up at number 109, and theirs at us. That day we had three bills and what looked like a card.

I rang the bell and told Mrs Blundy that it was us.

‘Oh good,’ she said over the intercom. ‘I’m coming.’

I handed over her post through the bars of her gate, and she handed me about ten letters addressed to us.

‘I’ve had some of these for ages,’ she said, as if it was my fault.

‘Why didn’t you drop them off,’ I asked, indicating our house, less the two hundred metres away. ‘Or phone me to come over?’ I’d given her my phone number at least three times.

Mrs Blundy waved her hand. ‘Why must I be running around?’ she asked. ‘It’s not my mistake.’

‘It’s not mine either,’ I said, trying to keep my voice even. ‘But I always bring your post as soon as I get it.’

‘Yes,’ she said, looking at me. ‘You do.’ This was said neither in admiration or gratitude, but rather in a way that indicated mystification at my strange neighbourly behaviour.

Standing outside the gate, I rifled through the pile of letters while Mrs Blundy looked at Amy with her nose slightly wrinkled, as if she smelt something bad. A lot of the post was junk mail, but there were some bills, which were probably now well overdue.

‘Mrs Blundy,’ I said, speaking slowly and evenly, ‘one day I’m going to miss something important because of this. All you need to do is send me an SMS when you get my post, and I’ll come over. Can I give you my number again?’

‘Oh,’ she said, ‘I’ve got your number.’

This was apparently as far as the conversation was going, because she turned her back on us and walked back into the house.

‘That lady’s being mean to Mommy,’ said Amy.

‘Yes,’ I said. ‘For some reason, she is.’

We looked at each other and we both started laughing. ‘Let’s go have a look at that school,’ I said.

‘Yes! School!’ echoed Amy, her hand in mine, and despite my irritation with Mrs Blundy, I felt quite cheerful.

\*

The school was a converted house, and as we approached we could see the garden filled with apparatus, and children playing.

‘Look, Mommy,’ said Amy. ‘A park.’

‘Let’s check it out,’ I said, ringing the bell at the security gate.

A woman of about forty-five, dressed in jeans and a floral shirt, came to the gate and let us in.

‘You must be Rebecca Prince,’ she said, holding out a hand and giving me a firm handshake. ‘I’m Trish. I’m the headmistress of the school.’ She smiled and put air quotation marks around the word ‘headmistress’, as if she knew this was a bit ridiculous.

‘Good to meet you,’ I said.

Trish knelt down. ‘And you must be Amy,’ she said. ‘I’m happy Mom brought you along to look.’

‘At the park,’ said Amy.

‘It’s a school,’ said Trish. ‘But it looks like a park, doesn’t it.’ She took Amy’s hand, and I waited for Amy to flinch and pull it back, or even cry. Instead, Amy looked at her hand.

Trish showed us around, pointing out which classroom Amy would be in, and introducing me to the teacher, Maureen. Both Trish and Maureen spent some time talking to Amy as well as to me. Scarred by my previous experiences, I asked about jungle gyms, imaginary play and snacks.

‘Our big thing,’ said Trish, ‘is that children need to be children. Sure, we have an agenda of things we want them to learn, but our first focus is always on whether they are happy.’

Looking around, the playground seemed to bear witness to this approach. Children laughed and played, and where one little girl sat alone, looking sad, a minder sat with her, stroking her back and talking softly to her.

I didn’t need to ask the fees, or anything else. I already knew: I’d found a school for Amy. Trish was delighted when I said I wanted her to start as soon as possible.

‘We’ve just had a pair of twins emigrate in Maureen’s class,’ she said. ‘You could start next week.’

She explained to me how we would acclimatise Amy to school, with me coming with her for a short time on the first day, slowly working up to a full day. I was delighted with this plan, having dreaded simply dumping Amy in a stranger’s arms.

