---
title: Friends
---

# Friends

Marilyn put everything into motion the next morning, but the tide turned even quicker than we expected.

While I was driving back from school, I tuned in to a morning talk show to take my mind off what was happening. Dropping the children had been stressful because the teachers had obviously both read the article. Trish had called me aside.

‘I’m taking it everything’s under control?’ she’d said.

‘The whole story is fabricated,’ I’d told her, and explained about the misunderstanding and the dropped charges, and that neither the lawyer nor the social worker were concerned.

‘Perhaps you could give me the social worker’s number?’ Trish had said.

I’d done so, but I felt hurt. And if things were hard for me, I wondered what Sean must be going through.

The radio did nothing to distract me, because to my horror they were discussing the article.

‘That man is a disgrace,’ a strident woman’s voice was saying. ‘It’s shocking.’

I thought they were talking about Sean, and I reached for the switch to turn it off.

‘Which man?’ came the familiar voice of the show’s well-known host, a woman who had interviewed me in the past. ‘Sean Prince or Ron Buckley?’

‘Ron Buckley,’ said the woman, her voice thick with hatred. ‘He’s basically saying that anyone who adopts a girl-child is unnatural and – to quote him – must have “an agenda”.’

‘And that’s obviously not correct,’ said the host in the mild voice she uses when things are getting out of hand.

‘At Adoption South Africa, we find this offensive,’ said the woman caller. ‘Adoption is a natural phenomenon, also seen in the animal kingdom. And people like the Princes – who have adopted one child and are providing this orphaned girl with a home – are the salt of the earth.’

‘But the child isn’t an orphan, from what I understand,’ said the host. ‘She has a biological father.’

‘The sort of man who sells his story to *About!*,’ snorted the caller.

This was exactly what Sean and I were worried about – if we told our story to *About!*, then we’d be no better. There was no winning with this.

Just as the radio host announced that she’d be taking more calls on the topic, my phone rang. I don’t usually answer while I’m driving, but I was hoping it might be Sean.

‘Hello,’ said a man’s voice I didn’t recognise. ‘Is this Rebecca Prince?’

I turned off the radio. ‘Yes,’ I said.

‘It’s James Mthetwa here. I’m the producer for Breakfast Banter on —’

‘Yes,’ I interrupted him. ‘I was just listening.’

‘Ah,’ he said. ‘Fabulous, then I don’t have to explain. Would you be willing to talk to us now?’

I thought for a minute. Breakfast Banter was regarded as a serious chat show, and the host, Thandi, was a fair and sensible woman. This would be far better than talking to *About!*, and the opportunity had just fallen straight into my lap.

‘Will you make it clear that you contacted me, and not the other way around?’ I asked, pulling over the car to the side of the road and switching on my hazards.

‘Sure thing,’ said James. ‘Fabulous.’

‘Okay,’ I said. ‘I’ll do it.’

‘Fabulous. Putting you through,’ he said with hardly a pause.

The line changed to a streaming of the radio show. I was glad that my painting had given me the chance to speak on radio – I knew a bit of what I was doing, although I wished I’d had a chance to talk to Sean and Marilyn beforehand.

‘The fabulous James has just told me that we’ve managed to get hold of Rebecca Prince, who has agreed to speak to us,’ said Thandi, her live-radio voice coming to me through my phone.

I smiled inwardly. At least I now understood why she always referred to her producer as ‘the fabulous James’.

‘Thank you for agreeing to speak to us on such short notice, Rebecca,’ said Thandi.

‘It’s a pleasure,’ I said. ‘Thank you for making the effort to get both sides of the story.’

‘So, let’s start at the beginning. You and Sean have an adopted daughter?’

‘Yes,’ I said. ‘We had fertility problems and eventually adopted Amy.’

‘Who is black?’ said Thandi.

I knew I had to handle this carefully – put too much weight on Amy’s colour and we are racist, but dismiss it and we are robbing her of her birthright.

‘Well, she’s mixed race,’ I said. ‘We help Amy celebrate that she is black, but in our eyes she is first and foremost our daughter.’

‘That’s lovely,’ said Thandi, and I felt myself relaxing. Too soon. ‘And when you adopted Amy,’ she continued, ‘were you aware of Sean’s so-called criminal history?’

Even though I knew that this was the whole point, I felt ambushed. But early in my career, Joanne had advised me to always know what my main point was in an interview, and to repeatedly get that across.

‘The most important thing to understand about those charges,’ I said, ‘is that they were only laid as the result of a misunderstanding. They were dropped completely and laid later against the correct person. There has never been any question that Sean molested anybody. The charges were dropped, and they were originally laid in error.’

‘Some people would say ‘no smoke without a fire’?’

‘Yes,’ I said. ‘There was a fire – a child had indeed been molested. But Sean was not the one who did it, and the only reason he was ever accused was a miscommunication. As soon as the child’s parents realised this, they dropped the charges and apologised.’

‘And how do you feel about Ron Buckley, Ruby’s biological father?’ asked Thandi.

I was silent for a moment. My real feelings would obviously not be appropriate, so I decided to go back to the source.

‘It’s difficult,’ I said. ‘Ruby’s mother, Lilith, was very clear that she did not want Ron Buckley to be part of Ruby’s life, and she had good reasons, which I’m not prepared to talk about on radio. Her will is also crystal clear on this point. That being said, I have to consider that Lilith might have been wrong, and that having Ron in Ruby’s life might be good for her.’

‘You can’t like that he has implied that adoption is unnatural?’ said Thandi.

‘Well, that’s simply ridiculous, isn’t it?’ I said, knowing that Ron wasn’t alone in this view. ‘Any thinking person knows that in the overwhelming majority of cases, abusers don’t adopt their child victims ... But maybe we have to consider that Ron is trying to protect his child.’

‘Do you really think that?’ asked Thandi.

‘I have to consider it,’ I said, ‘because the only other conclusion is that Ron is a deliberately destructive man. And that would be very worrying.’

‘And what about him selling his story to *About!*?’ asked Thandi.

‘It’s not something my husband and I would do,’ I said, ‘but that doesn’t mean it’s wrong.’

Thandi laughed at that point. ‘Diplomatically put,’ she said.

I allowed myself a small laugh. ‘Thank you,’ I said. ‘But this has been part of the learning journey for me – recognising that there are different ways of doing things in life, and that mine is not the only way.’

‘But you do think that Ruby should be with you and your family?’

‘It’s what her mother wanted,’ I said. ‘It’s a stable family environment with people who know and love her, and who have the means to give her advantages. Yes, I think it’s in Ruby’s best interests to stay with Sean and me.’

The first person who got through to me after the radio interview was Marilyn. ‘You were amazing,’ she told me.

‘Really?’ I was still sitting in my car at the side of the road, shaking, convinced that I’d messed up.

‘Listen,’ said Marilyn, ‘if this whole being-a-famous-artist thing doesn’t pan out, there’s a job waiting for you at my firm fielding media calls. *That’s* how good you were.’

I laughed. ‘I can’t think of a worse job.’

‘Pity,’ said Marilyn. ‘You’re a natural.’

Sean was next. And he didn’t phone, like I would have expected – he sent a text message: ‘I only caught the last bit when Clarissa SMSed me,’ he said. ‘You were good.’

***

Media reactions the next day were mixed. The story made all the major newspapers and radio chat shows, and there seemed to be three reactions: outrage over Ron Buckley’s implications about adoption; slightly less outrage that poor innocent Sean had been defamed; and then a view that we were totally in the wrong, that Sean was clearly a pervert, and that we were using our vast fortune to cover up the real story.

The frenzy might have disturbed us, except that the day held something far more frightening: Ron Buckley brought an urgent application to the High Court to have Ruby removed from our care. He asked for custody, alternatively that she be placed in a place of safety. Our date in the High Court was set for three days’ time.

‘A foster home if you’re lucky, or a children’s home,’ Marilyn confirmed when she delivered the bad news in her office that morning, having called us in early.

‘That’s not going to happen, right?’

‘It’s a stupid and weak case,’ she said, and I relaxed slightly. ‘But the judge hearing the applications this week has a bit of a history of doing strange things with children. Rumour has it she was abused as a child; she’s very neurotic. We need a watertight report from Clarissa, and we need affidavits from every character witness we can think of.’

Sean and I spent the next hour in Marilyn’s office going through our phones and coming up with our most impressive of friends, and friends who’d be prepared to vouch for us under oath. Marilyn assured us that her strategy would work.

After we’d come up with our list, Sean, sitting beside me, became very quiet.

‘Should I move out now?’ he said.

‘No,’ Marilyn said decisively. ‘That will look like an admission. Stay put.’

And Sean sat up a bit straighter. ‘Marilyn, draft those adoption papers at the same time,’ he said, ‘and send them to Ron’s lawyer. Tell them that anytime they want to sign, they can.’

I nodded vigorously. I’d been thinking too, and I’d also had an idea.

Marilyn looked at both of us. ‘I’m struggling to figure out how you guys think you can get him to go from asking for full custody to agreeing to an adoption,’ she eventually said.

‘You never know,’ said Sean.

‘Things happen,’ I said.

Marilyn nodded. ‘Okay,’ she said. ‘I just hope you two know what you’re doing.’

***

Afterwards I stopped by at Eugenie’s sex shop and, as she decorously sipped a cup of tea, I told her what was happening.

‘I guess I’m not on that list of fine upstanding citizens,’ she said with a laugh.

‘No,’ I admitted, rolling my eyes around the red-lit room. ‘But there *is* something I need you to do. Something far more important.’ And I told Eugenie my idea.

‘It might work,’ she said when I’d finished. ‘I’m in.’

I had to hope that my plan would work, because I could see a future in which the court said that Ruby-Mae must be with her father. Nobody seemed to care that Ron had abused Lilith or that Lilith had specifically said that Ron must not be allowed access to Ruby. So I would do what Marilyn had told us to do: find Ron’s button and push it. And the one thing I was sure about was that Ron Buckley wouldn’t want the care of a disturbed child. Hell, I wasn’t sure he even wanted the care of a perfect child – but Eugenie and I would be sure to make the prospect of looking after Ruby as unattractive as possible.

I didn’t know what Sean would think about this, so I decided not to tell him. He seemed to have utmost faith that justice would prevail – why else would he have given the inexplicable instruction for the adoption papers to be drawn up, just as it looked like Ruby might be taken away from us?

*I* knew that Ron Buckley wasn’t sitting around worrying about whether his behaviour was ethical or not. If I was fighting fire, I would use fire.

At the lawyers’ office, Sean and I had split our list of people to phone for an urgent affidavit. If they agreed, we had to pass on their details to Marilyn. Sean had the bulk of the list because he could make the calls from work, and I really wanted to spend all afternoon with the girls after school.

In fact, I felt an urgent need to spend time with Ruby. The thought of her being taken away from us – for any amount of time – was absolutely shattering. I felt like I had in those weeks after we met Amy, but before we were allowed to bring her home, to call her ‘ours’. I felt like the whole fabric of my family was in doubt. I couldn’t say so to Sean, who was so broken by the allegations of sexual abuse, and yet so strangely sure that we would win. To him, I pretended complete confidence.

Once I was home, I had just a bit of time before I left to fetch the girls, so I started my list with the easy people: Lerato (‘respected lawyer’) said she would do anything to help, and Joanne (‘Business woman’) offered to do several affidavits. But after that there were some strange reactions.

‘Well, I don’t really know, do I?’ said my friend Ashley, who we’d included because she is a teacher at a well-known girls’ school. ‘I can’t actually say that I think Sean is not a danger to children.’

‘For God’s sake, Ash,’ I said, her reaction taking me completely by surprise: it had never crossed my mind that she wouldn’t agree. ‘You know Sean. You’ve left your kids here for playdates.’

‘Maybe that was a mistake,’ said Ashleigh sweetly, and I wondered how I’d never noticed how irritating her voice was.

‘Maybe our friendship is a mistake,’ I said, slamming down the phone.

After Ashleigh, I took a few deep breaths and made successful calls to our dentist and GP. I phoned the girls’ school, and Maureen was thrilled to be able to help.

Then I phoned Janine, my old university friend, who was now a well-known radio personality and MC, and who’d spent many hours eating, drinking and laughing at our home.

‘You’ve got to understand, Becs,’ she said. ‘I can’t get involved in something like this. My name has currency.’

‘Exactly, Janine,’ I said. ‘We need that currency.’

‘Sorry, Becs,’ she said. ‘I just can’t do this.’

‘I hate being called Becs,’ I said, for lack of any better response.

Janine had always been calm and rational – which was probably why she’s so good at what she does. ‘If you’re going to ask people to do something like this,’ she said, ‘you can’t get upset if they say no. It’s a big ask, and we should be able to say no without losing your friendship.’

I sighed. ‘That’s easy for you to say, Janine.’

‘I know,’ she said, ‘but I’m gonna make like this never happened. In my books, we’re still friends.’

‘Okay,’ I said. ‘Bye.’

‘Bye, Becs. Chat soon.’

My phone rang almost immediately after that, and the caller ID showed Sean.

‘How’s it going?’ I asked him.

‘Rebecca,’ he said, ‘is this happening to you? People are saying no?’

‘Ashleigh and Janine,’ I answered.

‘Well, of the fifteen people I’ve phoned, five have said no. I can’t fucking believe it.’ He sounded like he might cry.

‘I guess if nothing else, we’re finding out who our true friends are,’ I said.

‘The worst is, some of them are so rational that I actually understand,’ he said.

I thought about Janine. ‘I know what you mean. But think about it: have you asked anyone who you wouldn’t have been happy to vouch for? Who you wouldn’t help in this situation?’

‘No,’ said Sean, his voice stronger. Then he gave a small laugh. ‘Okay, maybe I wouldn’t vouch for Ed. Irony is, he was happy to do it.’ Ed is Sean’s ex-boss. A pillar of the community – who we happen to know has a slight problem with coke and prostitutes.

‘Listen,’ I said, ‘we still have lots of great people supporting us. And we’re finding out who we can trust.’ I paused, and then because this was the most we’d actually said to each other in days, I said, ‘Sean, why did you want the adoption papers drawn up?’

‘Listen, I gotta go,’ he said. ‘I’ll see you later.’

The next blow came from the front page of the daily paper, which had been thrown into our driveway that morning, but which I only picked up when I arrived home with the girls at lunchtime. Previously known for its serious approach to news and current affairs, the newspaper had been slowly sliding into the tabloid world. I’d actually heard the editor being interviewed on the radio a few months before: ‘Print media is challenging. Sensation sells.’

And they’d certainly achieved their goal with that day’s front page.

Sean’s mother was pictured looking somehow both glamorous and vulnerable, and above it said the headline: *Sean Prince’s Mother Speaks Out*. And below: *Angela Prince says Sean is not the family man he would have the court believe*.

I sent the girls inside with Gugu and read the article standing in the driveway, with a weight in my stomach. Angela painted a picture of Sean as an uncaring and distant son: ‘He hasn’t called for months,’ she was quoted as saying. ‘We didn’t even know about this latest child.’ On the topic of the sexual offence allegation, she said, ‘We never uncovered the full story. Sean didn’t speak about it.’ And to top it off, ‘Rebecca is a cold woman. She’s obsessed with fame and has no space in her heart for family.’

As with the other articles, there was probably nothing we could actually attack. It was true that Sean never called, it was true that she knew nothing of Ruby or the baby I was carrying, and it was true that I had no space in my heart for her.

But the final straw about this article, the thing that made me wonder if anything would ever feel safe again, was the photograph of me. It was the one that Rose had taken all those months before, in the park, with Amy clambering over me. They’d edited Amy out of the picture, so it was just me, looking tired and pissed off. ‘Rebecca Prince, wannabe mother,’ said the caption. That picture that Rose had used to make me laugh, had now been used to hurt me.

My phone rang and I answered, expecting Sean. But it was James from the radio show again. ‘Up to an interview about this, hun?’ he asked.

This time I was more cautious. ‘Phone me in an hour,’ I said, walking slowly up the driveway, back into the house.

‘Fabulous,’ said James.

I phoned Sean, who hadn’t seen the paper and who became almost apoplectic with rage when I read him the story. Then I phoned Marilyn, and we agreed on what I would say on radio.

By the time James phoned me back, I had holed myself up in my studio, away from the girls, and the only place I could guarantee some quiet. I said that I’d make a short statement.

‘Fabulous, hun,’ he said. ‘Fabulous.’ I wondered if ‘hun’ had been added to his list of favourites, or if the endearment was just because I was now hot media property. ‘Hang on – you’ll be on in a sec.’

‘We’re speaking to Rebecca Prince,’ said Thandi as I came on air mere seconds later, ‘and she’s agreed to make a short statement about her mother-in-law’s attack on her and her husband in this morning’s article. Headline news, Rebecca,’ she continued. ‘Did you ever think that your mother-in-law would be headline news?’

I was ready with my prepared statement so I was somewhat thrown by the question. I took a deep breath. ‘No,’ I said. ‘It has really upset us.’

‘So what’s your take on this, Rebecca? Is it true that Sean is a terrible son?’

‘Basically, Thandi,’ I said, turning to the written statement I had in front of me, ‘it’s true that Sean and I have become estranged from Sean’s family. This is because of the extremely racist and non-accepting attitude she has had towards our daughter, Amy. Sean and I are not prepared to expose any of our children to that sort of person. Even if they are Sean’s parents.’

‘Those are strong words, Rebecca,’ said Thandi. ‘Do you want to flesh it out for us?’

‘I could give countless examples,’ I said. ‘But I’m not prepared to get involved in mud-slinging. At this point, all our energy is focused on keeping Ruby, and keeping both our daughters happy.’

‘So there you have it,’ said Thandi. ‘According to Rebecca Prince, her in-laws are racists and a bad influence on their children. Is it true, or is she playing the race card? Call in and tell us what you think.’

Suddenly I wanted to explain better, to go beyond the statement and make Thandi see what sort of person Angela really was, but it was too late: James was back on the line.

‘That was fabulous, hun. Thanks. I’m sure we’ll chat again. You have a fabulous day, hun.’

I made the mistake of listening to the studio radio after the interview. All sorts of people called in, and everyone had an opinion about my life and my choices. People said the most terrible things. One white woman phoned and said that, ‘with all due respect,’ nobody could ‘blame the mother-in-law for having trouble with a black grandchild’. Thandi took that woman apart, but I had a feeling that many people actually thought that way; more people than we had imagined or cared to imagine. Then a black woman phoned in and ranted about how we ‘had already stolen a child from a black family and now they want to steal this little white girl too’. Again, Thandi took her on, explaining patiently that Amy hadn’t been stolen, that her birth mother had abandoned her or given her up.

The final straw was when a voice came on the line that I recognised, and Thandi said that the caller had asked to stay anonymous but was a former friend of the family.

‘Rebecca Prince thinks she’s better than anyone,’ said the voice. ‘But she’s really a very average mother. Her adopted daughter is turning out to be a very average child. I can’t think why anyone would leave their child with her and I am starting to wonder if it all really happened like she says.’

The voice suddenly came into focus: Rose! I felt like I’d been hit.

‘Do you want to explain what you mean?’ said Thandi, but there was no answer, and after a few seconds Thandi said, ‘We seem to have lost anonymous from Johannesburg.’

I couldn’t listen any more. I turned off the radio, my hands shaking. I felt dirty and shamed and like I had let my children down. What had I done to Rose that she would turn on me like this? What steps had lead me to this place where my precious Amy and Ruby – a child entrusted to me by a dying woman – were now the fodder for tabloid reports and radio talk shows. I couldn’t believe that I had failed Amy so thoroughly, and so soon. It made me wonder if somewhere out there a young woman was listening, wondering if Amy was her baby.

That was the idea that broke me: the idea that all this publicity might make Amy’s birth mother regret giving her up. That, and the crushing idea in this moment of madness that Amy might in any way have been better off without us. Without me.

And that we might lose Ruby too.

All because of Ron Buckley.

After I turned off the radio, I took a few minutes to collect myself, taking great, deep breathes to stop myself from crying – or panicking. And then I phoned Eugenie.

We needed to go over our plan.

My afternoon with Ruby and Amy was lost.

