---
title: Epilogue
---

# Epilogue

I’m sitting in the playroom. It used to be a formal lounge, but with three children we’ve realised that a playroom is much more necessary. The afternoon sun reaches through the windows and baby Lilith – who we call Lili – is trying to catch sunbeams. She’s just started sitting and every time she reaches for one, she topples over and laughs.

Amy is sitting cross-legged next to me, colouring in. ‘Lili’s not very clever,’ she observes.

I laugh and kiss her. ‘She *is* clever,’ I say. ‘Just like her big sisters. I have the three cleverest girls in the world, all under one roof. It’s a miracle.’

And it certainly feels that way.

‘Ruby is not under the roof,’ says Amy pedantically. ‘Ruby is with her Bad Daddy.’

‘Blood Daddy,’ I correct automatically.

At the beginning, I was uncomfortable with the compromise we eventually reached – especially because we could have got away with not doing it. But the play therapist convinced me that, if Ron was willing, some relationship with him was in Ruby’s best interests. Ron got a job working for one of the big art expos that brings him to Joburg about once every three months. He takes Ruby to lunch, and sometimes to the zoo. Eugenie goes with, although she sits at another table and lags behind them at the zoo. Maybe one day we’ll feel safe letting Ron take Ruby on his own, but not yet. Still, even with Eugenie, I’m never completely comfortable with the arrangement, and I can’t wait to have my middle daughter home again.

‘Lili stinks,’ observes Amy, looking up from her page.

‘I think she has a poo,’ I say. ‘I’d better change her.’

I don’t know if she is summoned by the smell or my voice, but Gugu drifts into the room and scoops up Lili in her wiry arms. ‘Let’s change you, little thing,’ she says.

When Lili was born, I was determined that no girl would feel that I wasn’t paying them attention, and I tried to do everything for everyone. Sean watched this for two weeks, and then he arranged for Gugu and my mother to babysit, and took me out for dinner.

‘You’re going to have a breakdown,’ he said. ‘And that won’t help anyone. You need to ask for help and accept help. You need to use me. You need to use Gugu. You need to use your mother. You need to use your friends who are all gagging for time with the girls – Eugenie and Lerato and Joanne and Trixie. And you need to see that spending a little time alone with each girl is worth a lot more than spending all your time going crazy with all three.’

Giving a woman advice about mothering two weeks after she’s had a baby is probably not the best move. First I cried, and then I told him that he didn’t understand. And then I almost immediately told him that he was absolutely right and that I needed him and loved him. And then my milk started leaking and we had to go home.

But I listened. Sometimes I have to remind myself, give myself little talks about how I have to let the village help raise the children or I will lose myself. And I will be no good to my girls if my self is lost.

I can hear Lili gurgling to Gugu as they walk down the passage, and Amy is now hard at work gluing glitter and sequins to her picture. ‘She little artist,’ Trixie has once observed. ‘It in genes.’ And then she’d blushed – a roaring crimson that flooded her face. I was, of course, delighted.

Thinking of Joanne and Trixie makes me glance up at the wall. To where the Picasso used to hang: the Picasso that Sean used to bribe Ron.

For a long time, we expected to hear from Ron, telling us that it wasn’t worth what he’d thought and that we’d tricked him. But he hasn’t said anything. Either he hasn’t tried to sell it, or he’s too embarrassed to admit his mistake – ‘Or maybe he just really wanted a Picasso,’ suggested Eugenie. Sean agrees with her but I still can’t believe that.

In place of the Picasso, I’ve hung a family portrait that I painted, making us all different breeds of dogs and with some of our friends in the background. When Joanne saw it, her agent’s brain went into overdrive and now I have a waiting list of families wanting custom-made Dog family portraits. They cost a fortune, and if I was slow before, I’m now really, really slow, which makes them even more valuable. But the best part is that Sean has designed an app to help with the turnaround time. People upload their photos and some personal information so that I can get an idea of who they are without wasting time on scheduled meetings.

When I mentioned the app to Clarissa, she got excited about how it could be used for the adoption process. Sean and Clarissa then worked together on an app that uploads all the potential parents’ information and then cross-references it to other sources: Home Affairs to check your identity, your bank to check that you have the account that you say you do, universities to check that you have the qualifications you claim, and a separate aspect where your doctor can upload your medical information. They’ve sold the app to government to be rolled out under their supervision – for R25 million over the next three years. And right now, they’re in a meeting with a massive recruiter to look at how they can create a similar app for job seekers. So it doesn’t really matter how slow I am at painting.

Sean wasn’t really comfortable with how much the government paid them – he muttered a lot about ‘wasting tax payers’ money,’ an issue he probably feels more strongly about now that he pays so much tax. But then we talked about it, and we decided to sponsor a home for kids who aren’t as lucky as Amy and Ruby, with a particular focus on providing nurturing caregivers and a good education. It’s called ‘It Takes a Village’, and Sean got a few other businesses – including Eugenie’s sex shop! – to join him in funding the project. Clarissa is very involved, and she loves it. Sometimes, I take my three girls to play with the children there. Sometimes it’s hard not to bring more children home.

Then again, there are also days when it’s hard not to leave my girls there.

When Lili was born, I started taking the girls to the park again. Lili’s birth in many ways felt like a closure on the time that came before it, and I thought that I was ready to face the memories of the past. Our first visit was uneventful and it felt like I had made the right decision. But the second time we went, me and my three girls, we saw Rose. She was sitting with two other women in the place we always used to sit, and the three of them were deep in conversation. The two strangers were both turned to Rose like flowers to the sun, and Rose was gesticulating and laughing. My eyes scanned the playground, and I saw Maggie playing on the slide with a little girl and two boys. Lili was wrapped up against my chest and I could feel my heart pounding so hard against her body that I was surprised she didn’t wake up. For a moment, I thought I could brazen it out, but when I realised my hands were shaking, I knew we had to leave.

‘Girls,’ I said, ‘I’ve just remembered that there is a special on teddy bears at the toy shop. I think we’d better go now.’ Amy and Ruby looked confused, but were both incapable of resisting the words ‘teddy bear’ and ‘toy shop’. We turned towards the car, and when I looked back, Rose was staring at me. For a moment, she lifted her had as if she was going to wave, as if nothing had happened. But she dropped it half way, and turned back to her new friends.

After that, we found another park to visit. And I now keep myself separate from the families we met there.

I hear the gate opening, and shortly after that, the opening and closing of several car doors. That’s Eugenie with Ruby, and Sean has arrived home at the same time.

I get up to open the front door, and I lift Ruby up and give her a big kiss. ‘All good?’ I ask Eugenie.

She smiles. ‘All good.’

Sean gives Amy and Ruby a hug, and then goes to find Lili.

He comes back holding her, lifting her small body and blowing raspberries onto her stomach, which she finds hilarious.

‘That baby is so stupid,’ says Amy to Ruby.

‘I know,’ says Ruby. ‘I think we should have got a puppy.’

Amy nods, and I watch as they run off to their room.

‘Poor Lili,’ says Eugenie. ‘Maybe you should have another one so she isn’t always the third wheel.’

Sean and I both laugh, but I see him giving me an appraising glance, and I know there’ll soon be a conversation. I’m not sure how I feel, but if I’ve learnt anything this last year, it’s that you never know how things will turn out.

‘Oh, you,’ I say to Sean. ‘Stop having bright ideas, and go get that braai started. Lerato will be here in half an hour and she’s bringing her new boyfriend. An unmarried one, so perhaps we can all try not to scare him off?’

Eugenie looks at me and Sean, and at baby Lili, who has a finger up Sean’s nose. She glances to where the girls have disappeared out the door.

‘If anything in this house scares him off, he’s a fool,’ she says.

‘You just think that because you’re family,’ says Sean, putting his free arm around her bulk.

Eugenie smiles. ‘There isn’t a family I would rather have,’ she says. ‘That Lilith sure knew what she was doing.’

I smile at Sean. She sure did.

