---

---

# Rebecca

\[digi note: This needs to be circled to emphasise the last item on the list, and the fact that Lilith has chosen Rebecca.\]  
Lilith phoned me that night and said she’d taken my advice and made an appointment with her doctor for the next afternoon. She asked if I could look after Ruby-Mae, and I agreed.

‘You get yourself to a doctor too,’ said Lilith, her voice faint. ‘No point in both of us being man down.’ She coughed. ‘Gugu can look after the girls,’ she said. ‘Please don’t feel that you can’t go out because Ruby-Mae is there.’

I was going to make the appointment first thing the next morning, but Lerato phoned. Lerato’s days, she is often at pains to point out, are busy, and she – I quote – ‘can’t be yabber-yabber-how-are-things-with-you-ing’ all day. So when Lerato phones, I normally expect her to get straight to the point. We save our meandering conversations for when we’re together.

So I was a bit surprised when, after greetings and an obligatory discussion about Amy’s whereabouts and well-being, Lerato didn’t seem to have anything to say.

‘How’s things with your mommy friends?’ she asked. Her voice was strange, like she wanted me to believe that she didn’t care what the answer was, but that she really did.

When I told Sean about that later, he told me there’s no way a person can read all that in another person’s voice. ‘I don’t know about those persons, Sean,’ I’d answered. ‘But when it’s Lerato, I know.’

‘Why do you want to know about my mommy friends?’ I asked Lerato. ‘Do you want me to tell you I still love you best?’

‘Of course you still love me best,’ she said in a much more normal voice. ‘I was just wondering? How’s that one with the one at the school? And that Rose?’

‘Why do you remember Rose’s name and not Lilith’s?’ I asked.

‘No reason,’ said Lerato. ‘Stupid name, though. So, all fine then?’

‘You’re weird,’ I said.

Lerato sighed. ‘I know.’

We were silent for a bit.

‘Want to tell me why you really phoned?’ I asked, after I’d watched the second hand do a full round of the clock on the wall in the kitchen.

I could hear her breathing, but she took a few beats to answer. ‘No,’ she said. ‘But thanks.’

‘Sure,’ I answered, mystified.

We said our goodbyes, and I sat for some time trying to figure out what had just happened. Something was wrong with Lerato – that much was clear. But I couldn’t solve the puzzle. After a bit, I gave up, and went to dabble in my studio.

By the time I finished – I’d painted a miniature dog, a new idea that I was excited to share with Joanne – it was almost time to fetch the girls, and I still hadn’t phoned the doctor. I wasn’t feeling as drained as the previous day, so I decided to leave it till the next day. I was wondering what Lilith’s doctor had said to her as I grabbed my keys and set off to school.

Lilith’s appointment was for two, and the plan was that she’d come and fetch Ruby-Mae on the way home. As I cleared up the girls’ lunch plates, I got an SMS saying that the doctor was running late, with some crazy-looking emoticons next to the message, which made me laugh. At about three-thirty, I got another message saying, ‘On way.’ But by the time she actually arrived it was four-thirty. The girls had been good, if somewhat messy – taking every fluffy toy from Amy’s room and making a bed in the passage for them to sleep in. ‘Sleep, babies, *now*!’ Amy kept yelling, and Ruby-Mae would echo, ‘Now!’ So I wasn’t that put out by Lilith being late, and was preparing to tease her: ‘Nobody but you could take an hour to be on the way for three kilometres,’ was what I’d planned to say.

But when I saw her, the words froze in my mouth.

She looked awful, like she’d been crying. Her eyes were bloodshot, and the skin underneath was bruised and loose.

‘What’s wrong?’ I asked, taking her arm and guiding her in, relieved that Ruby-Mae hadn’t run out to see her.

Lilith breathed with a small shudder. ‘Oh, I just had a small meltdown, you know,’ she said, forcing a smile. ‘The doctor thinks I have a virus. Viruses can’t be medicated easily. I just have to wait it out, and I’m so tired. I am very, very tired. So I just had an enormous cry about it.’

Her tone was flat. Like she was reading a script. I put this down to her exhaustion, which I’d witnessed for myself.

‘What did he say you should do?’ I asked. We reached the house and went in, me almost guiding Lilith to a chair, where she half sat, half collapsed.

‘There’s nothing I can do,’ she said, looking at her lap. Then she seemed to recover herself. ‘What I mean is, he says I must rest, which is the most pointless advice to give the mother of a toddler. So I feel like there’s nothing I can do. Just ... nothing.’

I sat down next to her. ‘I wonder if I have the same thing, but milder,’ I said. ‘I’m tired the whole time, but you seem way worse. No offence.’

Lilith laughed weakly. ‘None taken.’

‘Because if there’s nothing but rest that’s going to help, I’m not going to bother going to the doctor. Waste of money.’

Lilith grabbed my arm, her grip unexpectedly tight and looked at me. ‘Rebecca, it’s really important to look after one’s health. Please, please go to the doctor.’

‘Lilith, I know you’re feeling overwhelmed,’ I said, pulling my arm away gently, ‘but viruses pass. If I have it too, we can lie in bed and rest together, and Sean can look after the girls and bring us endless cups of tea.’ I smiled.

‘That sounds nice,’ said Lilith. ‘But I’ve got a bigger favour to ask.’

‘Okay,’ I said, pretty sure of what was coming.

‘The doctor thinks I should check into hospital for two nights. So I can really rest ... Could you take Ruby-Mae again?’

‘When?’ I asked.

‘I want to spend the weekend with her,’ said Lilith, her hand worrying the crescent scar on her arm. ‘I thought Monday and Tuesday. That way they’re at school in the mornings, and you wouldn’t have to look after them all day.’

‘And then you’d fetch her on Wednesday after school?’

Lilith looked at her hands. ‘Yes. After school. I’m pretty sure I’ll be better by then.’

I rubbed her back. ‘I’m sure you’ll be better too,’ I said. ‘Wouldn’t you rather stay here and I’ll look after you?’

Lilith took my hand. ‘Rebecca, you’re such a good person. I am so grateful to you, and I’m sorry I’m creating all this trouble for you.’

‘Two nights is hardly trouble,’ I said.

‘Yes,’ said Lilith, ‘but still. Please know how grateful I am, how safe I feel knowing that Ruby-Mae is with you. If she can’t be with me, this is the right place for her.’

‘I’m taking that as a no,’ I said, and pretended to sulk. ‘You’re choosing hospital over being taken care of by me?’

‘They’ll give me medicine,’ said Lilith. ‘You know, to help me sleep. That’ll make it better and quicker.’

‘Well, if you’re sure. It’s really no problem having Ruby-Mae for two nights. And Amy will be thrilled.’

I asked her what hospital she was going to, and it was the same hospital where I’d had my laproscopes back in the days before Amy was born, so we talked about the food, and I joked that I’d better bring her some home-made meals. Lilith looked slightly panicked at the idea.

‘Please don’t visit me or anything, Rebecca,’ she said.

‘My food’s not *that* bad,’ I joked, although honestly I was a bit hurt. I was looking after her child, and she didn’t want to see me? But she answered my unasked question head on, in that way she had.

‘Two things. I’m supposed to be resting, and you make me laugh. I don’t think my grumpy doctor will buy into that. More importantly though, I’m only going to be able to rest if I know that Ruby-Mae is safe.’

I didn’t point out that she’d already told me she felt fine about me leaving the girls with Gugu, or that I’d most likely visit her in the mornings during school. And I knew that her second reason was just to make me feel better; the real reason was that her exhaustion was so severe that she really needed to get away from everything. Including my visits.

I understood. Or I thought I did.

We talked a bit more about the details, and then Lilith sighed deeply, and said she’d better get Ruby-Mae and be on her way. I hugged her goodbye.

That was the Tuesday.

\*\*\*

On the Wednesday, Lilith sent me a text to say that Ruby-Mae had a slight cold, so she was keeping her home from school. I worried that Ruby-Mae might have caught Lilith’s virus – something that could fell an adult as it had Lilith couldn’t be good news for a small child. And if Ruby-Mae had it, then what about Amy? I was feeling much better myself that day, but I took Amy’s temperature about seven times.

That evening I sent Lilith a text asking how Ruby-Mae was, and asking if it was anything I should look out for. She didn’t respond immediately, and I became worried that I’d offended her. That maybe it seemed like I was putting my own child first.

But just before I fell asleep, a message came through: ‘R-M is fine. Just sniffles. Doc says no virus. Playing it safe and keeping her home this week.’

Of course, I believed her.

