---

---

# Foster

Two things helped normalise the situation. Eugenie came back from visiting her mother in Port Elizabeth, and the foster hearing went off without a hitch.

After the strange end to Rose’s visit, Eugenie’s return was a comfort.

‘My bloody mother,’ she said. ‘Gets me down there on the pretext of a broken hip, and then uses me to make tea while all her friends and their children and their cousins and God-knows-who visit.’

‘Didn’t she really break her hip?’ I asked, shocked.

‘Oh, she broke her hip,’ Eugenie said with a wave of her hand. ‘She’s eighty-three – it’s almost compulsory in her social circle to have broken your hip. But she didn’t need me there. I was a glorified tea girl.’ Then Eugenie started laughing, her shelf of bosom heaving. ‘She kept trying to fix me up with men.’ She laughed so hard that she started wheezing. ‘Young men and old men, gay men and creepy men.’

‘Did you meet anyone?’ I smiled.

‘Jesus,’ laughed Eugenie, almost unable to breathe with the humour of it all. ‘I’m surrounded by sex in that bloody shop all day long. When I get home, I want my cup of tea and my book and maybe some knitting. Not some man.’

\*\*\*

We settled into a good routine, with Eugenie visiting every day or two, and looking after the girls for a few hours. The idea was that it would provide Ruby with a sense of continuity, and would give me a chance to work. We had an extra mouth to feed, as Rose had so awkwardly pointed out, and legal fees to pay. But the reality was that I was still exhausted by my pregnancy, and mostly I just slept in that time. I understood what Lilith had meant when she’d said she could sleep knowing Ruby was with me: I could sleep knowing my girls were safe and happy with Eugenie, just down the passage.

And when I did try to work, something was stuck. I don’t know if it was the pregnancy or the stress of the situation with Ruby or the knowledge that we actually needed the money, but for the first time since I’d started painting the Dogs, my muse upped and left. I tried painting miniatures, and made mistakes. I went back to larger pieces, and couldn’t make the composition work. I even tried some huge pieces, to shock myself out of the lethargy. Nothing.

When I spoke to Joanne, she said I was probably being too harsh on myself. But then she visited and – after spending two hours making papier mâché piggy banks with the girls – looked at the work, and conceded that maybe I needed to rest.

‘Or try something completely different,’ she said, not sounding the least bit worried in the face of my panic. ‘Cats maybe? You used to paint some lovely cats in your roomscapes.’

I agreed that was a good idea, but after that I still just went to nap whenever I contemplated working.

‘Don’t pressurise yourself,’ Joanne reassured on the phone. ‘It’s normal. Most artists have slumps.’

\*\*\*

The foster hearing was a strange experience. I’d expected the whole thing to be like a scene from an American television drama, but instead of the modern court room I’d pictured, Marilyn ushered us into a drab room, and introduced us to a huge woman sitting at a table.

Now that I’d met her once, Marilyn felt like a comforting presence. A kind of enormous mother-figure with an undercurrent of menace. I liked the menace – nobody would mess with us.

‘This is Magistrate Masilo,’ Marilyn introduced Sean and me, and Clarissa, who was also there.

Magistrate Masilo remained seated but held out a hand to shake. Her grip was flaccid and damp; it felt like holding a piece of bacon.

‘Sit,’ she said after the introductions. She looked at Marilyn and patted her braids with one hand. ‘Briefly, Ms Waxman,’ she said.

My heart sank. This woman looked totally disengaged from the tragedy that was playing out in our lives, and she didn’t seem very warm. I reached for Sean’s hand under the table – and found that he was gripping his palms so tightly that his knuckles felt like bones.

Marilyn gave the magistrate an extremely brief rundown of the situation.

Magistrate Masilo squirmed in her hard chair, shifting first to one side and then to the other, as if trying to find a better way to fit her bulk. She blew a stream of air up over her face and leant back in the chair, her arms folded. ‘Ms Grant,’ she said when Marilyn was finished, ‘you have a report?’

‘Yes, Your Worship,’ said Clarissa. ‘I have it here. Should I read it out?’

Marilyn and Clarissa had both told us that this was the usual procedure. Magistrate Masilo, however, had different ideas. She patted her braids again and glanced upwards, as if seeking advice from God.

‘Is there a copy on my file?’ she asked Marilyn.

‘Yes, Your Worship.’

‘And, Ms Grant, do you recommend that this child stay with these people?’

‘Most certainly, Your Worship.’

‘Order granted,’ said Magistrate Masipo, pulling a yellow Bic pen from beneath her papers. She scribbled something on the file cover. ‘Because the mother is completely unaccounted for, I’m going to ask you to come back in six months.’

‘As it pleases Your Worship,’ said Marilyn. I thought it sounded rather rude, but she later told me that was what you say at the end of these things.

Outside the courtroom, Sean and I were ecstatic.

‘That went really well,’ Sean said.

‘Thank you,’ I said to Marilyn. But Marilyn and Clarissa were furious.

‘Six months,’ fumed Marilyn. ‘Overburdening the courts with unnecessarily early returns, that’s what this is.’

‘But it seems fair,’ I ventured. ‘Anything could happen with Lilith.’

‘It’s utterly ridiculous,’ said Clarissa.

‘Exactly,’ said Marilyn.

‘Well,’ said Sean, ‘we’re thrilled. So maybe you two can stop worrying, and let me take us all out to lunch.’

And that’s what we did.

\*\*\*

By this time, it was almost a month since Lilith had disappeared.

On the one hand, Ruby was settling. She was asking for Lilith less, and sleeping through the night. On the other hand, the novelty had worn off for the girls. For Amy, Ruby was no longer an exciting and unexpectedly long-lasting play date, but a rival for my and Sean’s attention. And because we were so aware of what Ruby had lost and the uncertainty that had entered her previously safe and stable world, Sean and I were at great pains to give her a lot of attention.

It was only when Amy had, for the third day in a row, thrown four consecutive tantrums about things that usually didn’t bother her, that we realised she was desperately calling out to us.

Despite my extreme exhaustion, I was waking up at two or three every morning, worry churning through my brain, sending out sparks of adrenaline. I worried a lot about Ruby and about Amy, and about how there could possibly be enough of me to give to the baby I was carrying. But most of all, once the first few weeks had passed, when I lay awake at night, I worried about Lilith. My initial anger had given way to a gut-clenching fear.

‘People don’t just disappear,’ I said to Sean one morning after I’d tossed and turned for hours before, predictably, falling asleep minutes before the alarm clock went off.

‘Not if they don’t want to,’ he said gently. ‘Lilith must have wanted to.’

‘But where is she? Why can’t we find her?’

‘Because she doesn’t want us to.’

‘But she must be wild with worry about Ruby,’ I said.

Sean shrugged. He had little sympathy for Lilith these days; all his concern for her well-being seemed to have been transferred to Ruby.

‘And we don’t know her reasons,’ I carried on.

‘Would you ever leave Amy?’ he asked. ‘Or Ruby? Or this baby?’

No, I thought, I wouldn’t. But that made me worry more, not less.

