---

---

# Rivalry

I felt strange about the way that I’d left things with Rose, so after the foster order was granted, I called her. I started by apologising for being out of touch, as if the last visit hadn’t ended on a sour note. I explained that we’d been busy with lawyers, but were now more available, and I invited them for a playdate. All else aside, I hoped that the introduction of Maggie might dilute the increasing rivalry between Amy and Ruby. I knew that on one hand it was actually good, a sign that they were seeing each other as siblings. I kept thinking back to my own childhood and the endless fighting and hurting and teasing that was my relationship with Carl. But as much as I could see that this was a natural – even a healthy – progression psychologically, the constant bickering was wearing me down. We needed a break.

When Maggie and Rose arrived, Rose was in top form. She hugged me warmly, then held me at arm’s length and said, ‘You are looking fabulous. Such a strong woman.’

I wondered if I’d actually imagined the end of the last visit; at the very least, I had probably overreacted.

Maggie was eyeing the girls, who at that moment seemed to be the best of friends.

‘Look at that,’ said Rose. ‘Aren’t they the sweetest pair of sisters?’

I smiled, secretly thrilled. But I said, ‘Pair of devils, more like.’

Rose laughed and we all went inside, the girls dragging Maggie off to their bedroom, which we’d recently rearranged to make it more practical for two little lives.

‘This is my box,’ I heard Ruby say.

‘And this is mine,’ said Amy.

And I felt a lightening and gladness that I had overcome my pique with Rose.

Rose and I sat chatting, listening to the girls’ excitement voices that drifted from their room. I caught Rose up on the drama, and she filled me in on some of the park gossip. I hadn’t wanted to go to the park since Lilith had disappeared. I felt a streak of jealousy that Rose’s life had just gone on as normal.

The conversation moved on to Rose’s life, which still seemed mostly consumed with irritation about Aidan’s long hours and frequent travelling.

‘Yes,’ I said, remembering a conversation from what I by then thought of as Life Before Ruby. ‘Lerato mentioned to me that she’d met him through work. I think she’s the lawyer on some deal his company is involved in.’

‘Oh,’ said Rose. ‘That’s strange. They tend to use more senior people.’

I smiled. ‘Lerato is senior,’ I said. ‘She’s one of the best in her field.’ I wasn’t exactly clear on what that field was, but I was very proud of Lerato.

‘I suppose that makes sense,’ said Rose. ‘There’s a lot of pressure for them to beef up their BEE.’

‘I don’t think that’s why they use her,’ I said, wilfully keeping my voice mild. ‘She is very highly respected.’

Rose laughed as if I’d said something funny. ‘Anyway, it’s not like Aidan would make the connection,’ she said. ‘Those kind of details pass over his head.’ And we moved on to talking about things the girls had been doing and whether they were old enough to start horse riding.

We must have been talking about that for about fifteen minutes when Rose suddenly said, ‘Anyway, I don’t know what everyone sees in that Lerato woman.’

‘“That Lerato woman” being Lerato, my best friend?’ I said, laughing.

‘Oh, if you insist on calling her your *best friend*,’ she sneered. ‘Really, isn’t it a bit infantile?’

I tried to think objectively. ‘Maybe,’ I said, more to keep the peace. ‘But she *is* my best friend, so I might as well say it.’

‘Well, I don’t think she’s as pretty as everyone thinks.’

I had no idea how Lerato’s looks had suddenly become an issue. ‘I didn’t really choose her for her looks,’ I said.

‘Not you,’ said Rose.

I was about to ask what the hell she was on about when I remembered what Lerato had said about Aidan preferring black women. I was saved by Maggie letting off a neighbour-rousing yell and running, screaming, to where we were sitting.

She threw herself at Rose so hard that Rose was pushed back into the chair.

‘What is it?’ said Rose.

I reached out and put a hand on her. ‘Are the other girls being naughty to you?’ I asked.

‘They said I can’t be their friend,’ wailed Maggie. Her plump hands covered her face with the melodrama of only a tiny girl.

‘I’m sure they didn’t mean it,’ I said, looking up at Rose to exchange a ‘girls’ look of exasperation.

But Rose’s eyes were flinty.

‘Come, Maggie,’ she said. ‘It’s funny how people who pretend to be all accepting are often the worst.’

‘Rose,’ I objected, ‘they’re little girls. They say things like this all the time. It means nothing.’

‘Maybe,’ said Rose, ‘but instead of playing besties-besties, maybe you should spend more time teaching your *so-called daughters* some manners.’ Her words ricocheted off the walls and into my skin.

I stood up. ‘You know what, Rose,’ I said. ‘This is it. I’m not sure what your issue is, but you always seem to turn on me. I’ll be honest with you – I don’t have the strength to play these games.’

‘That’s just it,’ said Rose. ‘It’s all a game to you.’

That didn’t even make sense, and I spotted Amy and Ruby standing wide-eyed at the sitting-room door.

‘Gugu will open the gate for you,’ I said, grabbing the girls as I walked out.

I played with the girls in their room for a bit, to distract them from what had happened, and to try distract myself. But the conversation kept playing over and over in my head and I couldn’t make it fit properly. Eventually, I called Lerato.

‘You are not going to believe this,’ I started, and related the conversation, as close to word-for-word as I could manage. ‘I mean what the hell does she have against *you*? She barely knows you.’

Lerato was silent. I could hear her breathing, so I knew she was there.

‘Lerato?’ I said. ‘She barely knows you, right?’

‘Well,’ said Lerato, and in that split second I actually knew what was coming. ‘She barely knows me, but I am kind of sleeping with her husband.’

‘You’re sleeping with my friend’s husband?’

‘Kind of.’

‘What the fuck does that mean?’ I said. ‘How do you *kind of* sleep with someone?’

‘Well,’ said Lerato, and I could tell from the evenness of her tone that she knew she was totally in the wrong, ‘I’m seeing someone else as well. So it’s not serious.’

I digested this, thinking how it was still pretty serious for Rose. ‘But anyway,’ I said, ‘Rose presumably doesn’t know about this, so it’s not really an explanation for what happened today.’

Lerato sighed. ‘That’s where you’d be wrong. She knows.’

‘But,’ I said, my objections coming so thick and fast it felt like they were bottle-necking in my throat, ‘that makes no sense. If it’s not serious, Aidan wouldn’t have told her. So how did she find out? And she pretended she didn’t actually know that Aidan knows you. And —’

‘Here’s the thing,’ said Lerato, her tone serious. ‘Those people are crazy, Rebecca. Bat-shit crazy. They have a very sick dynamic in their relationship that I have been dragged into. And that Rose is the weirdest of the two. I could tell you things, but I won’t. But I think you should keep away from her. She is stark raving, Rebecca. Thank God Lilith didn’t leave Ruby with her.’

‘You remembered Ruby’s name,’ I said, suddenly smiling.

I could picture Lerato shrugging. ‘I’m an amoral slag,’ she said, ‘but I’m not heartless.’

‘Hey, that’s my best friend you’re talking about,’ I said softly.

‘Even though I’ve done this?’

‘Always.’ I paused. ‘But next time, maybe warn me.’

‘I’d have to look long and hard to find a situation that’s as fucked up as this one,’ she said with a sad laugh. ‘So I don’t think there’ll be a next time.’

I felt bad for Rose, but when I played back all the terrible things she’d said about Amy and Ruby, I thought maybe Lerato was right. Either way, this time I certainly wasn’t going to be the one to phone Rose. If she didn’t think my girls were good enough for her, so be it.

I just felt dirty that I’d told her so much.

