---

---

# Lilith

I didn’t have much time to dwell on it.

The call came the next day. I had taken the girls to school, and was engaged in what had become my morning routine of stroking my tummy, drinking tea and thinking about how I should really get to the studio and try to paint.

When my phone rang, all I felt was relief that I could legitimately put off doing any work for a few more minutes. The days of thinking that we’d hear from Lilith at every ring were over.

‘Hello. Could I please speak to Rebecca Prince?’ The woman’s accent was well-educated Johannesburg English: plummy tones that made me think I was perhaps dealing with an upmarket charity drive. I often got calls for painting donations and occasionally gave one, which made the calls multiply. ‘It’s Jean Fischer here from Hospice.’

I sighed. I was right. I’d given a painting to a Hospice charity auction three years ago. As much as I supported their cause, it felt like they’d been hounding me ever since. And with so little work available, I really couldn’t donate this time.

‘I’m sorry —’ I started, but Jean Fischer interrupted me.

‘I’m phoning in connection with Lilith Browne.’

My voice just stopped in my throat, unable to finish the sentence I’d started, unable to formulate a new one.

‘You’ve found Lilith,’ I managed to squeeze out after what seemed like such a long pause that the line might be lost. ‘Where is she?’

‘Oh dear,’ said Jean Fischer. ‘I see this is somewhat of a surprise to you. Lilith left me with the impression that you’d be expecting this call.’

‘Just tell me where she is,’ I said. ‘You have no idea ... We’ve been searching ... The police are looking ... Just tell her that it’s okay, we understand.’

‘I’m afraid I have bad news,’ said Ms Fischer. ‘Lilith died in the early hours of this morning.’

‘What?’ I felt as if the blood in my veins had suddenly become radioactive.

‘She was very brave in the end, and it was peaceful.’

‘What are you talking about?’ I said. ‘Listen, I think there’s been some misunderstanding. Lilith can’t be dead. Just tell her it’s okay. She can come home. We’ll help her.’

‘My dear,’ said Ms Fischer, her tone like that of one who regularly speaks to the deranged, ‘I’m starting to understand that this is a terrible shock to you. Lilith came to us about a month ago, when her oncologist told her she only had a short time left. She said that her child was with you, and that you’d agreed you should only be called when it was over.’ Jean Fischer gave a small cough. ‘I confess, I did wonder that you didn’t even phone.’

‘I didn’t even know she was sick,’ I said.

‘According to the medical history we have, she’s been battling cancer for the last two years. About a year ago she opted to stop conventional treatment. Like I said, about a month ago she was told she had very little time to live. She actually lasted longer than anyone expected.’

‘It was peaceful?’ I managed.

‘Oh, very,’ said Ms Fischer. ‘It’s not always, you know. But she was heavily medicated. She woke up at about eleven last night and had some water. She told the duty sister that Ruby-Mae would be fine, and then she went back to sleep. When we did our rounds, she had died.’

‘Alone,’ I said.

‘Well, yes.’ Ms Fischer sounded defensive. ‘We can’t sit at their bedsides waiting for them to die, you know. We simply don’t have the manpower.’

‘I didn’t mean to criticise,’ I said. ‘I just wish she’d told me. We could have looked after her. Been with her.’

‘At what trauma to the child?’ said Ms Fischer, her voice softer. ‘Lilith explained that she wanted Ruby-Mae to remember her as healthy, not scary.’

‘Honestly,’ I said, ‘being abandoned has been worse.’

Jean Fischer sighed. ‘Yes. The way Lilith explained was different, of course. She implied everyone knew what was happening.’

We were both silent for a bit.

‘Anyway,’ she said, ‘I’ve alerted the undertakers, but you’ll have to take over from here.’

‘What?’

‘A funeral or whatever you wish to do,’ said Ms Fischer. ‘And of course we have her things for you to collect.’

‘Oh God,’ I said.

‘I know this is a lot to take in,’ said Ms Fischer. ‘Perhaps you’d like to come this afternoon after the body has been removed.’

‘I think I need to see her,’ I said. ‘Where are you?’

Jean Fischer gave me an address. Lilith had been within ten kilometres of us the whole time.

\*\*\*

I phoned Sean and told him.

‘She’s *dead*?’ he said.

‘It seems so. I can’t quite grasp this. I need to see for myself. It feels like someone’s playing an elaborate prank on us.’

‘Like maybe she wants us to *think* she’s dead.’ Sean sounded cheered by this idea.

‘That hadn’t really crossed my mind, but I guess it’s a possibility.’

We were both silent, weighing it up.

‘I need you to meet me there,’ I said eventually. ‘I can’t do this alone.’

Sean didn’t hesitate. ‘Okay,’ he said. ‘Give me the address.’

We met at the Hospice, both parking in the treed street outside so that we could walk in together. Jean Fischer was exactly as I imagined her – a woman in her mid-fifties, with perfectly highlighted hair and a kind smile. She shook hands with us warmly, and indicated that we should follow her down a passage.

‘I know this has been an awful shock to you, but it’s something of a relief to me,’ she said as she walked. ‘I just couldn’t grasp how people close enough to take in Lilith’s daughter wouldn’t even have phoned to see how she was doing. I wondered if you could possibly be the right choice of guardian.’

‘We honestly had no idea,’ said Sean. ‘And I’m not sure you can call us “choice of guardian”. Lilith just left Ruby with us and didn’t come back. We have no legal standing, except that we’ve now got the court to declare us foster parents.’

Jean Fischer stopped walking and put her hand to her cheek. ‘Oh dear,’ she said. ‘She really gave the impression that things were formalised.’ She paused, and her carefully made-up eyes searched mine. ‘You are going to keep her, aren’t you?’ Then she clapped her hand to her mouth, making us both jump. ‘Oh, this is terrible,’ she said. ‘I’m speaking as if the child is an abandoned dog or something. I’m sorry.’

I patted her arm. ‘It’s okay,’ I said. ‘We’re also struggling to find the right language for our situation.’

‘Oh, Lilith said you were lovely, and I can see she was right,’ said Jean Fischer. She took a few more steps and then stopped outside a closed door.

I was grappling with the idea that Lilith had been talking about me to this woman, while I’d been struggling to understand that I’d been left with her daughter.

‘Well,’ Jean said, ‘here we are. She’s in here, and we’ve made her look her best. Nothing disturbing. She looks very peaceful. Would you like me to come in with you, or would you prefer to be alone?’

Sean took my hand. ‘Alone is fine,’ he said.

Seeing Lilith’s body had been my idea, but now that I was here, I didn’t want to go in. I’d never seen a dead body before and I wasn’t sure what to expect.

‘Come, Rebecca,’ Sean said. ‘We need to do this. For Ruby.’

I took a deep breath, gave my tummy a stroke, and went in with him.

The body on the bed seemed tiny and I felt a momentary relief – this couldn’t be Lilith, it was too small. But when I got the courage to lift my eyes from the body beneath the blankets to the head on the pillow, I was left with no doubt. It was Lilith; and she was dead.

I swayed against Sean, who helped me over to a chair next to the bed. A chair meant for visitors that Lilith had never had.

‘Why didn’t she tell us?’ I whispered.

Sean was looking at the table next to her bed, and he lifted a photo and showed it to me. It was one of Ruby-Mae laughing, her face half turned towards the camera, the sun catching her halo of blonde hair.

That was when I finally cried.

Sean stood next to me, stroking my back while I sobbed. Every time I thought that I had it together, I would imagine Lilith lying in her narrow bed, looking at the photo, knowing she was dying and thinking about her Ruby-Mae, and I would start crying again.

Jean Fischer came back and pulled up a chair next to me. ‘It’s good to cry,’ she said. ‘It honours the dead.’

I found that so profound that I started all over again, crying for the lack of crying over Lilith’s death. I knew Eugenie would cry too, but other than us, who would mourn the passing of this beautiful woman?

‘Oh God,’ I said, taking Sean’s hand. ‘We have to tell Eugenie.’

‘I’ll phone her now,’ said Sean, rubbing his eyes. He took out his cellphone and went into the passage to make the call.

A few moments later, he was back.

‘She’s coming over as soon as she can get someone to watch the shop. ‘She’s ... broken.’ His voice broke on the word.

The three of us sat in silence.

When Sean was sure that I’d stopped crying, he said, ‘Rebecca, this might seem cold, but maybe there’s a will here somewhere. Or something like that. So we know what she was thinking. She obviously meant for us to understand.’

‘There could be,’ said Jean Fischer. ‘It’s quite unlikely, but you never know. We try to respect the small amount of privacy our residents have left. But, oh dear, she really gave me the impression that she’d given you a will.’ She shook her flawless hairdo. ‘It’s funny, you know, you get a feel for these things. I really thought Lilith was a truthful person and now ...’ Her voice petered out.

‘I think she was a truthful person in a very frightening situation,’ I said. ‘I think she panicked.’

‘I just hope she knew that we’d look after Ruby,’ said Sean.

‘She wouldn’t have left her with us if she didn’t. And she obviously had a better feel for people than I do, because she wasn’t taken in by Rose.’ I felt a wave of anger towards Rose, mixed up with a need to talk to her – a kind of reflex.

‘Do either of you mind if I look around for a will while we wait for Eugenie?’ said Sean.

I shrugged and Ms Fischer said, ‘Go ahead.’

But he found nothing.

Eugenie and the undertakers arrived at the same time, and for some minutes Eugenie and I just held on to each other and sobbed and sobbed, Eugenie’s great chest heaving against me like a distraught beast.

Then Jean Fischer gently moved us out of the room to allow the undertakers to move Lilith’s body, and channelled us into a shabbily furnished office with one of the men from the undertakers. There was a box of tissues on a small wooden table, and two worn couches. The undertaker walked in as if he knew his way around – I suspected this room had a very specific purpose.

‘So,’ said the undertaker, ‘have we any idea what sort of service we would like at this point?’

I obviously hadn’t given the matter any thought, but as soon as the undertaker spoke, I knew we had to give Lilith as proper a send-off as possible. A gathering of the people who actually knew her. I didn’t want Lilith having one of those pathetic funerals with three people standing around awkwardly – I wanted better for her, and I wanted to be able to tell Ruby later that we had honoured her mother.

We said we’d think about things, and get back to them in the next few days.

\*\*\*

Eugenie and I sat down together that evening after the girls had gone to bed.

I hadn’t told Ruby anything because I simply didn’t have the tools. I knew I’d have to do it soon, especially if we intended having this funeral, but I’d decided that it was the work of the next day. In the meantime, Eugenie and I brainstormed every possible person that Lilith knew who would mourn her, and made a list. There were the people at the doctor’s rooms where she worked, the people from the crèche that Ruby had gone to before she changed schools, the neighbours at the flat. We even put Rose on the list, despite my misgivings. And we decided to put an advertisement in the classified section of the newspaper.

‘I don’t think people really look at those any more,’ said Eugenie. ‘Except old people like my mom. She’s always checking to see if her friends are dead.’

‘I know,’ I said, ‘but it’s better than letting her slip away uncelebrated. Someone might see it.’

‘Where did she go to school?’ asked Eugenie suddenly.

‘I have no idea,’ I said. ‘I know she grew up in Durban.’

‘Maybe we could put something on Facebook and ask people to share it,’ suggested Eugenie.

I hadn’t, for some reason, expected Eugenie to be a Facebook sort of person, and it obviously showed in my face. She chuckled. ‘Darling, Facebook is a dream for my type of business. You can do targeted advertising. The web-based side of the business has almost taken over the shop, and most of that’s from Facebook advertising.’

‘I didn’t even know you had a website,’ I said.

‘Discrete, you know,’ said Eugenie. ‘You can buy everything online.’

Sean walked in from reading to the girls. ‘What can I buy online?’

‘Trust me, you don’t want to know,’ I said.

‘Oh, trust *me*, I bet he does,’ said Eugenie, and we both started laughing, hers an asthmatic wheeze.

‘I never realised what a jolly business planning a funeral is,’ said Sean.

We tried to look contrite, but that just set us off again – a much-needed release. While we were trying to recover ourselves, Sean looked at our lists.

‘Newspaper ad?’ he said. ‘Facebook?’ (Which made us laugh again.) ‘Are you sure you don’t just want to contact actual people who knew her and keep it sane?’

‘We don’t know who knew her,’ I explained. ‘Out there somewhere is her childhood best friend and her first love, and who knows who else who will mourn her? We need to try.’

In retrospect, of course, the three of us were very, very stupid.

