---

---

# Ruby

I told Ruby the next day.

I kept the girls home from school. After the usual routine of breakfast and getting dressed, I tried to send Amy to play by herself so that I could talk to Ruby alone.

‘Amy love,’ I said, ‘Mommy wants to talk to Ruby and you can play with Gugu a bit. That’ll be fun.’

‘No,’ said Amy, ‘it won’t.’

‘No,’ echoed Ruby. ‘I want Amy.’

I didn’t think this was something I should share with Amy, so I tried again. But the girls were adamant: Amy didn’t want to leave us, and Ruby didn’t want to be left. The more I tried, the crosser they both got. I considered putting it off until I could quietly take Ruby aside, and I was tempted – it would grant me a reprieve. But my reprieves were over: I knew that I had to tell Ruby before someone said something in front of her. I would just have to do this with Amy there.

I took both girls into my room and I sat with them on my bed, one small body on each side of me.

‘I’ve got to tell you something sad,’ I said. ‘And it’s hard to understand.’

‘Like green,’ said Amy.

‘What?’

‘Green. Mommy said it’s blue and also lellow.’

I took a deep breath and reminded myself that they were only three, and probably weren’t going to make head or tail of any of this.

‘Remember when Ruby’s mommy was supposed to come and fetch her but she didn’t?’ I said. I felt Ruby stiffen next to me, and I turned so that she had my full attention. ‘Ruby, your mommy got really sick. That’s why she didn’t come back. She died, sweetie. She can’t come back, but she loved you so much.’

‘Where’s Mommy?’ said Ruby. She sounded almost hopeful, as if she absorbed that I now knew what had happened, but nothing more.

‘When people die, we bury their bodies. But the part that makes them the person we love is gone.’

‘Gone where?’

This was difficult. I wasn’t really clear on what message I wanted to give the girls, and I didn’t want to start up a religious path. I didn’t know how to explain to a three year old that she would never see her mother again – it was something I could barely take in myself. If I tried to think about it – about the loss, about the enormity – I started crying. How did I expect Ruby to grasp something so terrible?

I took each of them by the hand, trying desperately to formulate some thoughts on the subject, some words I could give Ruby. I had thought, before I started, that I knew what to say. But faced with the reality of Ruby, the reality of her loss, I realised that my pre-rehearsed phrases were meaningless. I wished that I had got some professional advice on how to handle this.

‘Barbie’s also gone,’ Amy said, interrupting my thoughts and shaking her head sadly – probably in an accurate parody of me.

‘Ja,’ sighed Ruby, ‘Barbie’s also gone.’

It was true that they’d lost a Barbie a few days before. None of us could work out exactly where, but I suspected that she’d been left in a shop, and they’d both been most upset by Barbie’s disappearance.

‘Maybe your mommy be’s with Barbie,’ said Amy.

I knew I should intervene, but this seemed to be working for them. ‘Wherever Barbie and Ruby’s mommy are,’ I said, hoping I wasn’t implying that they were definitely together, ‘wherever they are, they are at peace and they know we will look after Ruby and love her.’

‘Okay,’ said Ruby with a sigh.

‘Do you have anything you want to ask me?’ I braced myself. But I’d forgotten the blessing that is the mercurial mind of a three year old.

Ruby looked at me intently. ‘Can we have sausages?’ she said.

My relief was mixed with sadness that the person who had lost the most couldn’t grasp it. But, I comforted myself, there would be many versions of this discussion over the years. Lilith would be mourned by her daughter – I would not let her be forgotten.

When I told Sean how the conversation had gone, he gave a small laugh. ‘You realise,’ he said, ‘that if they ever find that Barbie, we’re completely fucked?’

I laughed too; I hadn’t thought of that.

\*\*\*

We decided not to take Ruby to the funeral. If there was one thing I’d realised, it was that she was too young to conceptualise what was going on, and it would serve no purpose. But I worried that in years to come, she would blame me that she hadn’t been there.

‘I know that right now you don’t want to know this,’ said Sean, ‘but from Ruby’s point of view, you’ll be the person she thinks of as her mother.’

That was both my greatest hope and my greatest fear.

‘Don’t worry,’ said Sean. ‘You’re doing fine. You can do this.’

The funeral itself was as well attended as I could have hoped. The doctor Lilith worked for and the other receptionist were there, and five of the moms from the previous school. Both Trish and Maureen from our school came, and two mothers who’d met Lilith at drop-off time, and couldn’t believe what had happened. Eugenie was there of course, with three people she introduced as neighbours from the flats, who all shook their heads at the shock of it. Lerato came – ‘Darling, I’m a professional funeral-attender,’ she’d said. ‘In a case like this, I’m happy to be rent-a-crowd.’

My parents came too. My mom remembered Lilith from Amy’s party, and announced valiantly that she would attend for the sake of her new grandchild. I was touched when I finally figured out that she meant Ruby and not the new baby. Sean’s parents didn’t come – they knew nothing of the latest developments in our life – but Susan and her husband came. And Clarissa. Also, the doctor had put up a notice at his rooms, and there were two elderly men, who turned out to be patients.

‘She was always so kind,’ said the one.

‘Always a good word,’ said the other.

Joanne and Trixie also came. ‘Not sure why,’ said Joanne. ‘I didn’t know her. Just thought I should.’

But best for me was a group of four women who, when I went over and introduced myself, said that they’d seen something on Facebook and had gone to school with Lilith. They hadn’t known she was in Joburg, hadn’t seen her for years, but they remembered her fondly. I explained that I was now Ruby’s guardian but knew very little about Lilith’s life, and I took their numbers so we could share memories that I’d later be able to share with Ruby. I wished I’d thought to bring a blank notebook for everybody to write their favourite memory, and made a mental note to ask people to email me.

I wasn’t at all sure whether or not to expect Rose. I’d sent her an SMS and heard nothing. In retrospect, perhaps telling a person about the death of a friend by SMS was in poor taste, but I had been wholly unable to call her after what had happened. To be honest, I didn’t want to see her and hoped she wouldn’t show, but she was also the one person who knew Lilith almost like I knew Lilith. But then when Lerato showed up for the funeral, I realised I had a social minefield on my hands, so when the service was about to start and there was still no sign of Rose, I felt relief.

We hadn’t known what type of service to have, and had simply opted for the prettiest church in the area, where a kindly Anglican priest had spent several hours talking to Eugenie and me about Lilith so that he’d have a good feel for her. Both Eugenie and I agreed to speak at the funeral, and when my turn came, I walked up to the podium at the front of the church and looked over the crowd.

There were three latecomers. One was Rose, dressed in a black dress with a plunging neckline and a wide-brimmed black hat with a veil. She looked like an Italian widow on the cover of a seedy romance novel, and I almost gasped out loud. Next to her was a nondescript young woman who seemed to be taking pictures – but I dismissed the idea as simply ridiculous, because who would take pictures at a funeral? And standing some way from them was a man with his cap pulled down, shadowing his face, and his hands deep in the pockets of a cheap-looking nylon windbreaker. And I didn’t have much time to speculate or absorb anything more.

I spoke about meeting Lilith and Ruby-Mae, and what a remarkable woman Lilith was, and how privileged I felt to be the guardian of her three-year-old daughter. I called on the people gathered to share their memories with me so that I could share them with Ruby when she grew older, and I vowed that I would keep Lilith’s memory alive for the sake of her daughter. I said that I had so much to be grateful for, even in the face of this loss. I said that the people who I knew would be beside Ruby with me on this journey were Sean and Eugenie, and then I invited everyone to join that number, because it takes a village to raise a child, after all.

When I sat down, people reached over to pat my shoulders, and then Sean put his arm around me on one side, and Eugenie gripped my hand on the other. The rest of the service passed in a blur.

When I came out, there was no sign of Rose or the other two mysterious funeral guests. I wondered briefly if I’d imagined them completely, but chided myself that no one could have made up Rose’s outfit. I tried to put them out of my mind, but their unexplained presence lingered like a bad taste.

Many years ago, even before I met Sean, I did a self-defence course. The instructor taught us many tricks and manoeuvres and physical defences. But at the end of each lesson, he told us that the most important thing we could do was trust our own instincts. ‘If it feels wrong, if something feels out of place,’ he said, ‘then don’t question it. Act. Because nine times out of ten, your instinct will be right.’

That day at the church, I forgot. Or maybe it was that I didn’t realise I was under attack.

But I was.

