---

---

# Ron

He arrived at the door the next morning. The girls were at school, and Sean was at work. I was drinking tea and sketching, pretending to myself and Gugu that at any minute I would go to the studio and work seriously, though neither of us was fooled.

The buzzer rang and I peered into the security camera. It was a man on foot, only the top of his cap visible. I could see a white car in the background. A Citi Golf, I thought, wondering when last I had seen one.

I answered the intercom. ‘Hello?’

‘I’m looking for Rebecca Prince.’ The man’s voice was low, his accent South African but not familiar, his vowels flat.

‘This is she.’

‘I’d prefer to come in.’

‘Could you tell me who you are?’

The man turned and looked straight at the security camera. A nice-looking man, I had to admit, but that didn’t mean he wasn’t a murderer. He looked at the camera for a long moment and I started to feel nervous.

‘How can I help you?’ I eventually said.

‘I’m Ron,’ said the man, turning back to speak into the intercom. ‘Ron Buckley.’

The name meant nothing to me.

‘Yes?’ I said.

He turned back to the camera and smiled so engagingly that I smiled back, even though he couldn’t see me.

Then: ‘I’m Ruby-Mae’s father. We need to talk.’

My first instinct was to slam down the intercom receiver, which is what I did. Ron Buckley didn’t seem to react. He carried on staring at the camera, a smile on his face. But the smile now seemed threatening and it didn’t reach his eyes.

‘No,’ I yelled, and Gugu looked up from her ironing. ‘No, no, NO!’

‘He can’t hear you,’ Gugu said, as if sharing some genuinely helpful information.

‘Gugu, press the panic button,’ I said. ‘No, don’t. Phone Sean. No, don’t.’

Gugu looked at me for a moment, and then picked up the iron again, shaking her head in disapproval.

‘Okay,’ I said to myself, ‘you just need time. You need a plan.’ I took a deep breath and picked up the receiver again. ‘Mr Buckley,’ I said, ‘I’m sure you can understand that this is a bit of a shock. I would prefer it if you would leave me your number, and I’ll let you know when my husband and I can meet you.’

‘You have my daughter,’ he said. ‘This is not something that can wait.’

‘I have Lilith’s daughter,’ I said. ‘I have no proof that you are who you say you are. But we will meet you tomorrow. I’ll let you know a time and a place.’

Again, he looked up at the camera. No smile now, eyes narrowed.

‘Okay,’ he said. ‘Fair enough. But don’t mess me around.’ A flash of a smile. ‘I know where you live.’

I wondered if he was actually trying to make a joke, but then Lilith’s words from that long-ago lunch came back to me: ‘He’s not particularly clever,’ she’d said, explaining why he would never find her.

But he had.

‘Mr Buckley, I have no intention of messing you around. But I will let you know when we can meet, and I would prefer it if you kept away from my home until then.’

Gugu was looking at me with interest again. I wondered if I should indicate to her to push the panic button that would call our armed response company, but Ron Buckley shrugged.

‘Okay,’ he said. ‘You’re just protecting my daughter. Can’t hold that against you.’

‘Okay then,’ I said. ‘Bye.’

‘My number?’

‘Oh yes. Wait.’ I grabbed the nearest piece of paper and pencil – the same ones I’d been sketching with earlier – and took down the number. ‘Okay, I’ll be in touch.’

He waved at the camera. ‘Bye, Rebecca,’ he said. ‘See you tomorrow.’

For the first time in my life, I was shaking so much that I could barely stand. I half stumbled, half collapsed against the wall. Gugu ambled over and helped me to a chair.

‘Is it bad?’ she said.

‘Very.’ Even my voice wobbled. I could feel the tears building. ‘That was Ruby’s father.’

‘Ruby doesn’t have a father,’ said Gugu decisively.

‘Apparently she does.’

But Gugu’s words nudged me: the first thing I’d do would be to ask for a DNA test. Just because a good-looking, stupid man called Ron claimed to be her father, it didn’t mean that he was. But I had a bad feeling: the air of threat had communicated itself through the security camera and intercom, matching Lilith’s description.

The man who caused her crescent-shaped scar.

I hugged myself as Gugu shoved my phone under my nose.

‘One,’ she said. ‘Call Sean. Two. Call a lawyer. Three. Call Eugenie.’

I looked at her, overwhelmed with gratitude. Gugu had a game plan, and it seemed to be a good one.

So that’s what I did. I called Sean. And he called Marilyn Waxman. And Marilyn called Ron Buckley, and arranged that we all meet at her office the next day.

When I left to fetch the girls from school I felt nervous, expecting to see Ron Buckley loitering on street corners. At school, I instructed the teachers that under no circumstances were the girls to be fetched by anyone other than myself or Sean or Eugenie, particularly Ruby, and particularly but not only if that person was a man. That’s how I was speaking – saying things like ‘particularly but not only’.

‘We never let any children go home with unidentified strangers,’ Trish said with an amused smile. ‘You don’t have to worry.’

‘Maybe I should keep them at home,’ I said, completely not reassured. ‘It’s not like they *have* to come to school.’

‘Rebecca, we’ll understand if you do that, but I promise you, I guard every child here as if they were my own,’ said Trish, completely not offended.

‘Right,’ I said. ‘Right. Okay. I’m going to talk to Sean and the lawyer, and see what they think. Right.’

Trish smiled. ‘Right,’ she echoed.

I looked around carefully before I walked out of the school gate, convinced that I’d see Ron or the white Citi Golf I’d glimpsed. But there was nothing suspicious.

Maybe I was overreacting. Maybe Ron just wanted to see if Ruby-Mae was in good hands, and then he’d disappear again.

Maybe.

\*\*\*

Despite the slight lifting of my fear, I didn’t want to leave the girls at home the next day when we went to talk to Marilyn Waxman. I called Eugenie to update her, and when I told her what was happening, she left the shop and came straight over.

‘What do you know about him?’ she asked after she’d given the girls a cuddle and a new set of crayons each.

I told her briefly about the lunch with Rose and Lilith, and what Lilith had said about Ruby’s father. ‘Now that I think about it,’ I said, ‘she was obviously prepping us. In case this happened.’ I laughed without humour. ‘I guess Rose was still in the running back then.’

But Eugenie wasn’t going to be sidetracked.

‘She told me much the same,’ she said. ‘Only in a lot more detail. He’s a dangerous man, Rebecca, incredibly abusive – I couldn’t believe the things she told me, and trust me, I’m not exactly naïve.’

‘I know,’ I said. ‘Sean’s going over to see the lawyer just now, but I’m feeling like I should stay here with the girls. I really don’t want to leave them.’

‘Go,’ she said to me. ‘I’ll stay. It’s important that the lawyer really understands what kind of a person he is. You need to emphasise that.’

I agreed and phoned Sean to let him know that I’d meet him there. As I was about to leave, Eugenie touched my arm.

‘Rebecca,’ she said. ‘I know you have money, but I just want you to know that if you need more to fight this man, I’ll help.’

‘Thank you,’ I said, and my eyes filled with tears. I wasn’t really sure why, except that Eugenie was such an unexpected friend, who had so quickly come to mean so much to me. I don’t know what I would have done without her.

\*\*\*

Sean was waiting for me in the parking at Marilyn’s offices and we went in together, holding hands. I was glad of this when we saw that Ron Buckley had got there before us.

He was sitting back, his hands behind his head, surveying the waiting room. His jeans were worn and he had on the same nylon windbreaker, which I now recognised from the funeral. His cap was now on backwards, so that he looked slightly like an aging rapper, and he was chewing a match. I thought that he would have looked incongruous and uncomfortable in this sleek, professional setting, but instead he looked like a cock among chickens, and the receptionist kept touching her hair, a fresh sheen of lipstick on her lips.

He stood up when we walked in and there was an awkward pause while I waited for him to say something and he, apparently, waited for me to introduce him to Sean. But I couldn’t do it – I couldn’t find the words to act like this man wasn’t threatening everything that we had built up over the last few weeks. I felt like we were stepping into battle, and he was acting like we were at a cocktail party. Eventually, looking at me as if he couldn’t believe I’d let him down so badly, he stepped forward, holding out his hand.

‘Ron Buckley,’ he said. ‘Ruby-Mae’s father.’

I sensed Sean’s hesitation, but there was no way he couldn’t shake Ron’s hand without seeming the lesser man.

‘Sean Prince,’ he said eventually. ‘Ruby’s guardian.’

For a moment they seemed frozen in the manly gesture, bound at the hands, assessing relative strength. Then both men released, each surreptitiously rubbing their right hands with the other, I noticed.

‘Nice offices,’ said Ron, looking around as he unthinkingly flexed his hand. ‘Waste of your money. We could settle this privately.’

‘We would rather have our lawyer in the room,’ said Sean, sounding pompous even to me. ‘To protect Ruby-Mae’s rights.’

‘I’m her father,’ said Ron, adjusting the match in his mouth. ‘Way I understand it, I have rights too.’

‘If you are indeed her father, I’m sure our lawyer can clarify what rights, if any, you have.’

Ron chewed the match thoughtfully. ‘Dates work out. So I’m the father. Lilith wouldn’t have gone with another man.’ He shrugged. ‘You can try fight me into a corner, Mr Prince, but at the end of the day, I know what I know. The kid’s mine.’

The battle had already started.

Sean was saved from responding by the appearance of Marilyn’s secretary calling us through to a small meeting room.

As we trooped through, there was no doubt that Marilyn Waxman intimidated Ron Buckley in a way that we didn’t. He hesitated as he entered the room, and wiped his hands on the windbreaker, straightening it out. He removed the match from his mouth, and touched his cap for a moment, as if wondering about the wisdom of his sartorial choices.

Marilyn lowered her half-moon glasses when he introduced himself, taking her time to take him in, and shook his proffered hand just a moment before he would have had to drop it. He looked out of place and nervous now, like the child in a room full of adults.

Marilyn sat down, and the three of us followed suit.

‘Mr Buckley,’ she began, ‘let me start by explaining that I am here to represent the interests of Mr and Mrs Prince. A social worker and the courts represent the interests of Ruby-Mae Browne. But this meeting is merely so that you can put forward your position and proposals. After that, I will advise my clients on what their rights are. I suggest you retain your own counsel to advise you as to yours.’

‘I’m not paying for some fancy-ass lawyer,’ said Ron, suddenly finding his confidence again. ‘I know what I know. The father has rights.’

Marilyn didn’t even twitch one of her heavy eyebrows. ‘So it is your contention that you are Ruby-Mae Browne’s father?’

‘I’m her father,’ said Ron, reaching to his mouth for the match and finding it missing.

‘Are you listed as such on the birth certificate?’ asked Marilyn, who knew full well that he wasn’t.

Ron shrugged.

‘Do you have any proof at all that you might be her father?’

‘I was living with Lilith at the right time,’ said Ron. ‘Fucking her,’ he added, watching Marilyn for a reaction.

Marilyn didn’t flinch. ‘Were you married?’

‘No,’ said Ron. ‘Living in sin.’ He waggled his eyebrows and grinned, trying to make it sound racy.

‘We call it cohabiting these days,’ Marilyn said with a small smile. ‘I’m sure a psychologist could unpack for you why you see it as sin.’ She didn’t give him time to retort. ‘So, basically, you have no proof of paternity?’

Ron shrugged. ‘You can do one of those DNA tests,’ he said.

‘Everyone’s an expert these days, aren’t they?’ muttered Marilyn.

I was impressed with Marilyn’s approach of simply denying Ron’s paternity, though the truth was I had no doubt that Ron was Ruby’s father. A paternity test wouldn’t help our case – it would just give us some time.

‘Let’s assume for a moment that the test came back positive,’ said Marilyn. ‘What is it you want?’

Ron opened his eyes wide – this was obviously his innocent face. ‘I just want what’s mine,’ he said. ‘I want my kid.’

‘Are you employed, Mr Buckley?’ said Marilyn.

Ron Buckley looked down and fiddled with his cuff. ‘Had a great job,’ he said. ‘Manager. But the boss was out to get me.’ He paused. ‘I’m talking to a few people.’

Marilyn made a note on the paper in front of her. ‘Unemployed,’ she said, as if to herself.

‘And where are you living, Mr Buckley?’ she asked.

‘Here in Joburg, I’m kipping on the floor at my mate Stanky,’ said Ron, a little too quickly. He had enough wit to look slightly embarrassed.

‘And will you be taking Ruby-Mae to live on the floor at Stanky’s?’ Marilyn’s tone was neutral, as if this was a perfectly reasonable proposal.

Next to me, I felt Sean’s back stiffen.

Ron looked confused. ‘Thought she was staying at them,’ he said, with a jerk of the head towards us.

‘But you just said you want her?’ said Marilyn. ‘So I presume she would actually live with you?’

Ron seemed to have an epiphany. ‘They could buy me a place,’ he said, again indicating us with his head. ‘They’ve got the bucks.’

Marilyn put down her pen. ‘Mr Buckley,’ she said, ‘what I don’t think you understand is that the Princes don’t actually have any legal duty to provide for Ruby-Mae. If you take her, as her sole surviving parent you will be the *only* one financially responsible for her. The Princes can walk away. They can walk away right now if they wish.’

Sean flinched, but Ron seemed to have another moment of inspiration. ‘The government gives people money for looking after kids,’ he said, as if that fact settled everything.

‘Yes,’ said Marilyn, for a moment looking so defeated that I bought her charade. ‘You’re quite right. The state will give you three hundred and fifty rand a month. I’m sure that’ll do it.’

‘Well that’s a fucking outrage,’ said Ron. ‘Someone should do something about that.’

‘Yes, it’s shocking,’ said Marilyn mildly. Then she gathered together the papers in front of her, and straightened them with some deliberation. ‘Tell you what, Mr Buckley. Why don’t you go away and think this through a bit. Come back and tell me if you really think living with you is in Ruby-Mae’s best interests. That’s what the court looks at, you know? Her *best* interests.’ She looked slowly from him to us.

Ron’s eyes narrowed. ‘I think you’re fucking with me, lady. My brother knows some lawyers in the clanger. I’m gonna get some advice.’

Marilyn smiled and opened the file again, making another note. ‘You do that,’ she said. ‘You get your lawyer to call me. Oh wait, if they’re in the clanger, they can’t. *You*’d better call me.’ She handed him a card.

He stood up and pocketed it.

It felt like we all breathed a collective sigh of relief as Marilyn indicated to the receptionist to show him out. Then she closed the door to the meeting room and leant against it.

‘Nasty piece of work,’ she said.

I jumped up. ‘But you were fabulous,’ I said.

Sean was standing too, holding out his hand. ‘How can we ever thank you?’ he said.

Marilyn ignored Sean’s hand. ‘Please, sit down again,’ she said. ‘That went well only insomuch as I played the power dynamics quite well. I’m rather good at it, and when it comes to men like him, I get some pleasure.’ She gave a shrug. ‘But the reality is that the legal picture is not actually in your favour.’

‘But,’ I interjected, ‘you said it yourself – the court will look at Ruby’s best interests. Us, or an unemployed wife abuser. That’s assuming he can even show he’s the father.’

‘First,’ said Marilyn, ‘if he can show that he was living with Lilith at the relevant time, there is actually a legal presumption that he *is* the father. It would be for us to show that he’s *not* the father.’ She looked at me. ‘Any chance of that, do you think?’

I said nothing and looked at my hands.

‘Thought not,’ said Marilyn. ‘Although we’ll make him jump through hoops on that one. Once he’s the father, though, the court then assumes that it’s in Ruby’s best interests to have some sort of relationship with him. At the very least.’

‘But that’s bullshit!’ exclaimed Sean. ‘He’s never even tried to find her before this. He’s not interested in her.’

Marilyn squeezed the bridge of her nose. ‘If he’s not interested in her,’ she said, ‘then what is he doing here?’

The question hung in the air.

‘Okay,’ said Marilyn, ‘the game plan from here is that we wait to hear from him, and then we take it one day at a time. If he contacts you directly, have him call me. If he arrives at your door, send him away. If he starts hassling you, we’ll get a protection order. We keep him away from Ruby unless a court tells us otherwise. One step at a time.’

