---

---

# Home visit

The idea of letting Ron Buckley into our home appalled me. But I also agreed that it would be easier for Ruby if she was in a familiar environment. Reluctantly, I agreed with Clarissa that she could set up a time with Ron to visit Ruby at our house.

‘Just watch him the whole time,’ I said to Clarissa. ‘If you need to go to the toilet, you take Ruby with you.’

‘It’s an hour, Rebecca,’ she said. ‘I think my bladder will last. Stop worrying – this is part of my job. Ruby will be fine.’

I told Ruby that a very old friend of her mom’s wanted to meet her, and that he would come to visit with Clarissa. She seemed excited, and told me that she like Clarissa. I wanted to shake Ruby, to yell that she was in danger. Instead, I pulled her little body towards me and held her.

‘You’ll have fun,’ I said. ‘You just remember that Rebecca and Sean love you so much, okay?’

‘Okay,’ she said. ‘Ruby loves Becca too.’ Then she turned to go back to the blocks she’d been playing with. Even though we had, in my eyes at least, lost in court, and had to allow Ron Buckley into our home, at that moment I felt like a winner.

That first afternoon I took Amy out, and left Clarissa and Gugu to meet Ron. Ruby was excited to have Clarissa as her special visitor, and Amy was excited to have special time with me. I was the only one who didn’t think this was the most fabulous day since Christmas.

Amy and I went and had what Amy called a ‘lady date’: decaff cappuccino for me (because of the baby) and a babyccino for Amy. Amy’s favourite thing to do with the cup of frothy milk was to line up a paper sachet each of brown sugar, white sugar and sweetener. She’d then carefully tear the top off each one, lying them down again. When all three were open, the sugars were added one by one to the babyccino and stirred in, a look of great concentration on Amy’s face. Then she’d pick up the small cup, take a sip, and give a sigh of contentment – a mirror image of Sean having his first sip of coffee of the morning.

Usually when this happened, I got frustrated. I’d say things like, ‘Too much sugar, Ames,’ and, ‘Don’t mess now,’ but that day I just sipped my coffee and watched her, enjoying the absorption of a small child.

‘Good?’ I asked, after the first sip.

Amy sighed, and leant forward. ‘A bit sweet,’ she confided.

I laughed out loud, and she beamed with pleasure. We ordered cake and afterwards we walked around the shops, and talked about what we hoped Father Christmas would bring us.

‘He’s bringing you a baby,’ she said, pointing at my tummy.

‘Well,’ I said, ‘the baby won’t be here till after Christmas. And the baby is a present for all of us. Daddy, Mommy, Amy, Ruby.’

Amy frowned. ‘Is Ruby ours forever?’ she said.

‘I hope so,’ I answered.

Amy thought for a bit. ‘Me too,’ she eventually agreed.

\*\*\*

I made sure we got home after Ron had left.

‘How did it go?’ I asked Clarissa, sinking down onto a couch. Amy and Ruby had thrown themselves at each other as if they hadn’t seen each other for a week.

‘Rebecca, I need to be neutral in this, so I’m going to be careful what I say,’ she started.

I felt my eyes fill up with tears. It felt like everyone who was supposed to see our side of the story were carefully trying to see Ron’s.

‘What I can tell you,’ she said, ‘is that he has absolutely no idea what to do with a three-year-old girl.’ She winked, and moved a cushion so that she could sit next to me. ‘It was kind of funny.’

I sighed. ‘Anything else you can tell me?’

Clarissa breathed out and lent her head against the back of the couch. ‘The thing that surprised me,’ she said, ‘was that he seemed interested in art. He looked around at your pictures, and he knew about your dogs.’

‘He’s researched me,’ I said.

‘But he knew quite a lot,’ she said. ‘He was very taken with your print of the Picasso.’

‘Actually,’ I laughed, ‘it’s an original etching. Although that sounds so grand. It’s not really worth all that much.’

But I loved that Picasso. Sean had given it to me on our first wedding anniversary – a paper gift in line with tradition, an in-joke about the fact that the grand master had also drawn his dog, and a reference to the first time Sean and I had met. I wasn’t lying – a Picasso etching is not like a Picasso painting, and is actually moderately affordable. Ironically, you could buy a Picasso etching for cheaper than you could buy an original of my Dogs. But still, when Sean had bought it, it had stretched the budget. I loved him for his thoughtfulness and the largesse of the gesture, and of course it was fun to refer to ‘the Picasso’. It’s one of those items that I’d never sell, not for anything, and I told Clarissa the story.

‘So,’ I said, ‘he’s abusive, stupid and awful, but at least he has good taste.’

Clarissa rubbed her forehead. ‘I’ll be sure to mention that in my report,’ she deadpanned, and we laughed more than was warranted, a release after what had been a hard afternoon. ‘I’d like to observe them at my rooms next,’ she said after a few moments, professional again as she stood up. ‘Force them into a more one-on-one situation. Could you bring Ruby to me at 3pm on Thursday? After that we can alternate venues.’

‘Okay,’ I said. ‘Just promise you’ll watch him.’

‘Rebecca,’ she reminded me, ‘that’s kind of the whole idea.’

\*\*\*

On Thursday, I took Ruby to Clarissa.

I hadn’t wanted to. I really didn’t want to face that man again – it was too upsetting and emotionally draining. Sean was going to do it, but then an important meeting came up – ‘This one could be it, Rebecca,’ he’d said.

I smiled, and told him that of course he couldn’t miss it. But the reality was that I was starting to lose faith in Sean’s dream, the app that would make our fortune. There’d been too many meetings that ‘could be it’, and too many disappointments. And with the way things were, I needed to find a way back to painting to keep things running smoothly at home.

So I asked Eugenie to take Ruby to the appointment.

‘I would, Rebecca,’ she said, ‘but there’s something you need to think about.’

‘What’s that?’ I’d found myself more open to advice from Eugenie than I was from other people.

‘You think of Clarissa as your friend, but she’s not. She’s an officer of the court and she’s there to observe you all, not just Ron Buckley.’

‘I know that,’ I said, feeling defensive.

‘So I think it’s important you show her that you’re putting Ruby first,’ she said. ‘Take Ruby today, and show that even though you hate Ron and it’s awkward, you’ll do what’s best for Ruby.’

I sighed and agreed, which is how I came to take Ruby.

\*\*\*

We arrived early, and settled into Clarissa’s small waiting room. I hoped that Ron Buckley would be late, that he’d show himself to be unreliable, but he arrived a few minutes after us.

‘Hello,’ he said to me.

I nodded. ‘Hi.’

He bent down and looked at Ruby. ‘Hello, Ruby-Mae.’

Ruby looked at him and then at me. ‘Him again,’ she observed.

I laughed and to my surprise Ron laughed too. ‘Him again,’ I agreed. ‘I guess he really likes playing with you.’

Before Ruby could respond, Clarissa’s door opened, and a child came out with her mother. I could immediately see there was something strange about the child – she was looking at her feet and flapping her arms next to her sides.

Clarissa looked around. ‘Rebecca,’ she said, ‘would you mind keeping an eye on Amelia for two minutes while I chat to her mom?’

‘Sure,’ I said, although I wasn’t really sure how to go about watching this child.

‘Just let her be,’ the mother said with a wan smile. ‘If she tries to go through a door, stand in her way and she’ll turn around.’

‘Okay,’ I said. ‘I think I can manage.’

The mother smiled, and followed Clarissa back into her playroom, and Ron apparently saw this as an opportunity to show what a nice guy he was.

‘Well hello, Amelia,’ he said.

Ruby looked at him, and then at Amelia, whose arm-flapping had suddenly increased in speed.

‘I don’t think she likes talking,’ observed Ruby.

‘She just wants to play, don’t you, Amelia?’ said Ron, reaching out a hand.

Amelia started making a low, soft keening noise. She still didn’t look at anyone.

‘Ron,’ I said, ‘I think she’s autistic. Please just leave her alone like her mother asked.’

Ron looked at me and then back at Amelia. Then he sat back in his chair and crossed his arms. ‘Autistic, huh?’ he said.

I nodded. ‘Or something like that.’

‘They should just put kids like that down,’ he observed, looking at her coldly. ‘Waste of oxygen. Waste of white skin.’ He paused. ‘Although I suppose I shouldn’t say that to you. No offence. Just that these retarded kids give me the heebies,’ he said, as if I would agree with him.

I was so stunned I couldn’t speak. For a moment, when we’d both laughed with Ruby, I’d actually thought I’d misjudged Ron Buckley.

Before I could say anything, Clarissa came out of the playroom, followed by Amelia’s mother, who looked like she’d been crying. When she saw that Amelia was keening, she shot me an accusatory look.

‘I’m so sorry. This gentleman didn’t quite understand.’ I indicated Ron, feeling like the class tattletale, pleased to have someone to pin the blame on but embarrassed that at my age I felt the need to.

‘Ron and Ruby, please come through,’ Clarissa said before Ron could defend himself, but he shot Amelia a look of revulsion before he followed Ruby into Clarissa’s office.

‘I’m really very sorry,’ I said to Amelia’s mother again. ‘I tried to stop him but he’s a doos.’

She smiled weakly. ‘The thing I’ve learnt in the last few years,’ she said, ‘is that most people don’t listen or understand. He’s probably not a doos – just a person who can’t imagine that you can still love a child like this.’

‘I’m not sure he’s a person who can love anyone,’ I said.

As Amelia’s mom left, I felt strangely bereft. I had an hour to wait before Ruby was finished with her session, so I stepped outside and phoned Eugenie to tell her the latest horrific story about Ron Buckley. At the end of the conversation, Eugenie was quiet.

‘Are you still there?’ I said.

‘Rebecca ...’ she said slowly, ‘what if we plant the idea in Ron’s head that there’s something wrong with Ruby?’

‘Well, there clearly isn’t,’ I said.

‘*I* know that. But Ron knows nothing about children,’ said Eugenie. ‘And clearly very little about things like autism, from what you are saying.’

‘I could mention the play therapy ...’ I said, becoming excited. ‘And kids do pretty crazy things sometimes, but he won’t know that’s normal. Do you think it’d work?’ At this point I knew I would do anything to make Ron leave Ruby alone.

Eugenie sighed. ‘Well, we still don’t know what the hell he wants from all of this. But it’s worth a try.’

‘We can’t tell anyone, Eugenie,’ I said. ‘It could look really bad.’ I paused. ‘It *is* really bad.’

‘We won’t tell anyone,’ agreed Eugenie. ‘Not Sean, not Lerato and definitely not Clarissa or Marilyn.’

‘Agreed,’ I said. ‘But I’m still not sure about this.’

‘Rebecca,’ said Eugenie, ‘sometimes you have to do whatever is necessary. Life isn’t always black and white, good and bad. Sometimes you have to cross a line to make good things happen.’

I realised that Eugenie was right – it was time to stop being naïve. It was time to step up to the plate and do whatever was necessary to save Ruby.

Having made my decision, I felt a frisson of energy that I hadn’t known for weeks. I sat in the waiting room, rubbing the baby bump I now sported and planning what I could say when Ron and Clarissa emerged. I had to be subtle, but not so subtle that Ron missed it.

There was a shelf of books standing in the corner, so I leapt up to scan the titles. *Coping with Your Disturbed Child* – that would do the trick.

When Ron and Clarissa came out, Ruby holding Clarissa’s hand, I was absorbed in my book. I looked up, as if surprised at where the time had gone. Carefully, I placed the book on the chair, title up. ‘Interesting,’ I said, tapping the cover. ‘Such useful advice.’

‘I think we’ll have the next session at your place, Rebecca,’ said Clarissa. She was businesslike, but sounded tired. ‘Ruby didn’t really like it here.’

‘No problem,’ I said, probably sounding manic as I thought of all the subtle clues I could scatter around the house. ‘Some children find being out of their comfort zone very hard,’ I added. ‘Very disturbing.’

Clarissa looked at me with a puzzled furrow between her eyes. ‘It’s nothing to worry about, Rebecca,’ she said.

I gave a deep sigh. ‘I can’t help worrying about Ruby,’ I said. ‘But I’m sure her play therapist can help with this.’

‘That’s a good idea, Rebecca,’ said Clarissa. ‘Will you be comfortable with me giving her a call?’

Ron’s brow, I noticed, furrowed slightly.

‘Of course,’ I said. ‘We all have to work together to give Ruby the help she needs. It’s an ongoing project.’ I wondered if I was laying it on too thick. ‘Anyhoo,’ I said, using an expression I despise, ‘we must be off now. I have to stop at the chemist for Ruby’s meds.’

And we left quickly, pushing past Ron in our haste. I was so delighted with myself that I kept laughing in the car as I replayed the conversation, and Ruby started laughing too, although she didn’t know why.

‘Is it funny because that man is ugly, Mommy?’ she eventually asked.

Had she noticed that she’d called me ‘Mommy’? Whether or not she’d done it intentionally, it had slipped out, and I laughed again from sheer joy.

‘*Is* it?’ she insisted.

‘That man has many problems, Rubes,’ I said, ‘but ugly is not one of them.’

When I got home, I phoned Eugenie and told her how well it had gone.

‘You’re a genius,’ I told her. ‘I owe you. In fact, I’m going to do a painting for you.’

Eugenie laughed. ‘Rebecca, I love your paintings but I know you’re struggling to paint – if you manage one, it certainly mustn’t be for me.’

But I’d already pictured a painting for Eugenie to hang in the entrance to the shop. A Rebecca Williams Dog doing a pole dance – I could see it perfectly.

‘Eugenie,’ I said, ‘I’ve got to go paint. Chat later.’

With a shout to Gugu to watch the girls, I all but ran to my studio. Should the dog be pole dancing, or lying on a chaise longue in sexy lingerie? Both were vivid to me and I couldn’t decide, so I took out two canvases and started prepping them both. While the first layers of paint dried, I did some sketches – naughty dogs flowed from my pen, and I couldn’t sketch fast enough.

‘I’m onto something,’ I SMSed Joanne.

And to Eugenie: ‘I think you might have saved my career.’

Clarissa phoned me that evening as I sat back with a cooldrink, thinking about the work I’d managed that afternoon. It was good. I was happy.

‘Rebecca,’ she said, ‘I’m a bit worried that you are overreacting to this situation. Ruby-Mae is fine, you know. You don’t have to worry.’

‘I’m not worrying, Clarissa,’ I said. ‘Just making sure that she gets all the care and attention she needs.’

Clarissa was quiet for a moment. ‘I guess I can’t fault that,’ she said. ‘But don’t get all crazy on me.’

‘Don’t worry,’ I said. ‘No craziness here.’

‘What meds is she on?’

‘What?’

‘This afternoon you said you had to fetch her meds. What meds?’

‘Oh ... she’s had a snotty nose. Just picked up some nasal spray.’

‘She seemed okay to me today,’ Clarissa said, but then laughed. ‘You made it sound so serious.’

I tried a laugh. ‘Really? No, no, just a snotty nose.’

‘Okay,’ she said. ‘I’ll see you at your place on Tuesday.’

\*\*\*

But I couldn’t make it on the Tuesday. I’d painted all weekend like a woman possessed, while Sean watched the girls. Eugenie had relieved us on the Sunday, taking them out for the afternoon – ‘Rest,’ she’d told me.

But I couldn’t. I had to paint.

By Monday, I was feeling ill, tired and nauseous, and I became frantic with the idea that my crazed painting had hurt the baby. The only time the gynae could see me was that Tuesday afternoon, so Sean agreed to come home to hand over to Clarissa and Ron, and Eugenie said that she would take Amy out.

I returned after my appointment to a house that almost seemed normal. Sean told me all about it later that evening after the girls were asleep. My feet were up on a stool and I was drinking tea because the doctor had told me to take it easy for a few days, to limit my painting to a few hours, and to sit whenever possible while I worked – ‘We don’t want to rob the world of your work entirely,’ he’d said, and I’d had a vision of a pregnant Dog for his office wall.

Sean and Ruby had been doing a puzzle together on the floor when Ron had arrived early. Gugu had let him in.

‘Oh,’ he’d said, taking in the scene. ‘I didn’t realise you’d be here. And so ... involved.’ Sean said that he made ‘involved’ sound both ludicrous and suspicious.

‘I see myself as Ruby’s father,’ Sean had answered simply, standing up.

‘*I’m* Ruby’s father,’ Ron had said.

Ruby had looked up at the two men. ‘My mommy’s dead,’ she’d said conversationally.

Then Ron had stepped right up to Sean and said, ‘Don’t fuck with me.’

Sean’s response was that he’d be sure to mention what language Ron considered appropriate in front of a child when we were next in court. And luckily, Clarissa had rung the doorbell at that point.

When Clarissa came into the house, Sean had taken her aside and asked if Ron could wait outside for her in future, to which she had agreed.

‘I didn’t like him in our space without her,’ he said to me.

Sean thought that Ron would’ve taken that minute alone with Ruby to show what a good father he was, but when Clarissa and Sean had walked back into the room, Ruby was playing on her own, and Ron was standing in front of the Picasso.

Apparently Ron had asked if it was real, and Sean had just said, ‘Yes.’ Then Ron had said something about that it must be valuable, which would normally be Sean’s cue to explain that it wasn’t really. Instead he said, ‘Yes. We can afford it.’

‘I don’t know, Rebecca,’ Sean said now, leaning forward to rub my feet, which were still propped up on the stool. ‘It’s so childish, but I just wanted him to know that I could afford a Picasso and he couldn’t.’

‘Testosterone,’ I said. ‘You were having a stand-off like two male lions.’

‘And do you think I won?’ he asked.

I sighed. ‘I think the fight is far from over.’ Sean looked so defeated that I added, ‘But at least you can afford a Picasso.’

‘It’s not that valuable,’ said Sean.

‘It is to me, my love.’

But the next week, when I again saw *About!* in my local shop, I knew that Ron had won this round of the battle.

*Suspected of abuse!* screamed the headline, with a photo of Sean holding Ruby’s hand. The picture looked like one of those taken of Hollywood stars trying to enjoy a private holiday: blurry and furtive.

My hand shook as I took the magazine off the shelf.

*Man who seeks to adopt little Ruby has dark secret*, said the strapline on the cover. I opened the magazine, and read: *A case of child molestation was opened against Sean Prince, then 18. His 11-year-old cousin was the victim. The case was dropped with no explanation. Now Sean has adopted one little girl and seeks to adopt another.*

The article went on to rehash the previous article, saying nothing more about the charge until the end: *Is Sean Prince a suitable man to be given care of two minor girls? Ron Buckley, Ruby’s biological father, thinks not. ‘It’s not natural to want a child that isn’t yours unless you’ve got some agenda,’ he says. ‘Now we know this guy’s agenda.’* The article ended with another plea for donations.

I dropped the magazine, and made it to the pavement before I vomited.

\*\*\*

Sean was devastated.

‘Maybe I should move out,’ he said. ‘So nobody takes the girls away.’

I didn’t know what to say. I knew Sean was innocent – he’d told me about the dropped charges ages ago. The cousin who’d actually abused the cousin had even done jail time. But I hesitated in responding because I knew my number-one job was to protect my girls.

Maybe Sean was waiting for me to immediately say no, he must stay, but instead, I said, ‘Let’s see what Marilyn and Clarissa think.’

Sean looked at me like I’d kicked him.

‘Sean,’ I said, reaching out to touch him, ‘I have to protect the girls. And if there’s any possibility that they might be taken away ...’

Sean nodded. ‘Yes,’ he said eventually. ‘I just didn’t realise you’d be so keen.’

Can a marriage ever recover from this? I wondered.

But when we spoke to Marilyn, she dismissed the idea of Sean moving out without a thought. ‘So, the charges were dropped and it was all a misunderstanding?’ she asked when we’d explained what had happened.

‘Yes,’ said Sean. ‘But that’s not what people will think.’

‘The courts are not in the business of what people think, Sean,’ said Marilyn. ‘They’re in the business of objective facts. And the objective fact here is that this is a huge nothing.’

‘And what about me?’ said Sean. ‘What about the fact that everyone I know and everyone I don’t know now thinks I’m a paedophile? Nothing’s going to fix that.’

Marilyn nodded. ‘I agree. Usually I tell clients to ignore this sort of trash, but I think in this case we should do two things. One – they must print your version. Again, I don’t usually recommend engaging with this sort of media, but we, or rather you, need an article setting the record straight. Especially as there are now fools out there sponsoring Ron Buckley. Two – I want to threaten him with a defamation case. I’m not sure we should actually go through with it, but let’s see where we get with a threat.’

‘I don’t want to be seen to be going after the money,’ said Sean.

‘Anything we get out can be put into a trust for Ruby,’ said Marilyn decisively, and Sean nodded.

‘I can live with that.’

Clarissa was similarly dismissive of our concerns.

‘Honestly,’ she said, ‘I’m also thinking of suing. What does it say about me if I’d allowed a known sex offender to adopt a child? *Obviously* you and Sean had police clearance before you adopted Amy. It’s shoddy journalism. Shoddy.’

We told her what Marilyn had said about threatening a lawsuit, and holding the money for Ruby.

‘I like that,’ said Clarissa. ‘I’ll give her a call and add a separate threat from my side.’

We were all a bit high with all the talk of law suits and our story in *About!*, but when Sean and I climbed into bed at the end of that day, there was silence between us.

