---

---

# Court

On the day we went to the High Court to fight for Ruby, we left the girls with my mother. I’d decided to keep the girls out of school because I’d begun to worry about journalists finding them.

My mother was thrilled to look after them, and both girls were delighted to be spending the day at Granny’s house. Interestingly, Ruby had called my mother ‘Granny’ from the moment she met her, although she’d still only called me ‘Mommy’ that once.

My mom hugged me close when I said goodbye. ‘You go get ’em,’ she whispered in my ear.

I thought about telling her my plan, but I knew the less people who knew, the better.

Eugenie came with us in our car. ‘Explain why again?’ Sean had asked that morning, as if I was yet again inconveniencing him.

‘Because I want her with me,’ I’d said. ‘She makes me feel better.’

But Sean had been distracted, walking in and out of the house. At one point, I thought I saw him putting a wrapped parcel in the boot of the car, and he insisted being the last one in the house to lock up.

‘What was that?’ I asked as we reversed down the driveway.

‘What was what?’

‘What you put in the boot?’

‘Dunno what you’re talking about,’ he said. ‘Come on, we don’t want to be late.’

\*\*\*

When we got to the court, I tried to get Sean to come with me to find Marilyn, but Sean seemed to have an agenda of his own.

‘You go find Marilyn,’ he said starting off in the same direction as Eugenie, who’d gone off to fulfil her side of things. ‘I just want to go to the toilet.’

‘Love, I’m sure there’s a toilet this way too,’ I said.

‘Well, I want to go this way,’ he snapped. ‘Just let me be.’

I couldn’t argue without turning it into a fight, just when we needed to show the court a calm, united couple. And maybe, I thought, we weren’t as united as we used to be; maybe that was gone forever. But we did both want to keep Ruby.

‘Okay,’ I said. ‘Well, join me as soon as you can. I have my phone.’

Marilyn was waiting near the designated court room. She explained what would happen, making sure I understood that the whole process would be based on the written papers and there would be no witnesses and cross examination, like on TV, unless the judge asked to hear from somebody. Then she introduced me to the advocate, a Jonathan Pratt, who would be presenting our case.

‘Don’t worry, Mrs Prince,’ he said. ‘We’re going to win this.’

He wasn’t what I’d have expected from an advocate. He was shorter than me, and seemed a bit uneasy, biting the side of his thumb as Marilyn spoke. But Marilyn had advised us that he was the best for this type of case, and had enjoyed great success before this particular judge. We had to trust her.

Marilyn asked, ‘Where’s Sean?’ just as I turned to look for him.

‘He went to the toilet,’ I said. ‘I think this has thrown him – he’s acting really strangely.’

‘It’s understandable,’ said Jonathan Pratt, pausing from chewing his thumb. ‘This is not an easy process for anyone.’

I liked Jonathan Pratt a bit better after that, though I thought wryly how, unlike Sean, at least *I* had made it to the court’s doors.

It was at that point that I looked down the passage and witnessed the bizarre sight of Ron Buckley, deep in conversation with his attorney, leading what looked like a pack of people: a man in a black gown who I assumed was his advocate; Eugenie, her bulk almost spanning the narrow passage; and Sean, a look of intense irritation on his face.

I knew what Eugenie was up to – and she gave me a quick nod of her head as they drew level with us. But Sean glared at me.

‘What?’ I asked.

‘Nothing,’ he said. ‘This is just all so irritating.’

I had no idea what aspect of the nightmare Sean was finding simply ‘irritating’, but I had a plan to execute so I let it go. I sidled up to Marilyn.

‘Do you have a copy of the adoption papers?’ I hissed at her.

Marilyn looked at me over her half-moon glasses. ‘Yes, Rebecca,’ she said, ‘I do. But only to keep you two crazy people happy because – and I’m saying this for the last time – they are completely irrelevant at this stage.’

I smiled. ‘That’s what you think.’

Marilyn looked at me again, and then turned theatrically to Jonathan Pratt. ‘They used to be the most balanced, reasonable clients,’ she observed.

Meantime, Ron Buckley was moving into the court room and Eugenie almost squashed a small blonde lawyer in her effort to follow close behind him. The lawyer – unbelievably – managed to remain at Ron’s side, but I was relieved to see when we walked into court ourselves that Eugenie had planted herself right next to Ron, a sheen of sweat on her forehead.

Ron was deep in conversation with the small blonde lawyer, flashing his fake smile, his body language all invitation. But Eugenie appeared quite patient. Now that she was in position, she’d make it happen. I could have kissed her.

Sean, sitting next to me, was looking around the court with a scowl on his face. He spotted what looked like a reporter and his scowl deepened. He leant forward and tapped Marilyn, who was seated in front next to the advocate, on the shoulder. He whispered something to her, indicating the reporter. Marilyn glanced over, and nodded, whispering something to Advocate Pratt.

At that moment, a court orderly asked us all to rise, and the judge came in.

I don’t know what I’d been expecting, but Judge Mathibe was not it. For a start, despite her name, she was white. Also, she was tiny and, with her wild hennaed hair and too much blue eyeshadow, she looked like a small but brightly coloured bird. The court bowed to her and she bobbed her head back and sat. There was a rustle of gowns and papers as the rest of the court sat back down.

Judge Mathibe glanced at her papers. ‘Urgent application in the matter of Buckley versus Prince,’ she said, looking up. Her eyes were unusually large, the white showing all around the iris.

‘For the applicant, M’Lady,’ said the advocate for Ron Buckley, popping up for a moment.

Jonathan Pratt stood up and drew his robe around him. ‘For the respondent, M’Lady,’ he said. ‘And I beg the indulgence of the Court but I must start by moving for a removal of the press from the Court. This matter involves a minor and the reporting on it has already infringed both the rights of that minor and of my client.’

‘Mr Pratt,’ said the judge, ‘are you going to tire me today?’

‘I hope not, M’Lady,’ said Jonathan, unphased.

The judge sighed. ‘Mr Hart, what is your take on this?’

The advocate for Ron Buckley stood up. ‘The press know the rules around reporting a court matter, M’Lady. And this matter is of public interest.’

Jonathan was on his feet again. It felt like a tennis match.

‘With all due respect, M’Lady. This matter is not of especial public interest per se, but has become a public spectacle thanks to the actions of the applicant, to which we refer in the papers. And the rights of the minor outweigh any considerations of public interest.’

Judge Mathibe steepled her hands and I awaited a wise and Solomonic pronouncement. In the end, however, she said, ‘Oh, stuff and nonsense, Mr Pratt. The press stay.’ She looked up and glowered at the court. ‘If anybody breaks the usual sub judice rules relating to minors, they will find their arses whipped with a contempt charge so fast they won’t know where to sell their next story.’

I was taken aback by her language and glanced around the court. One or two other people looked surprised, but the lawyers didn’t even flinch.

‘As the Court pleases, M’Lady,’ said Jonathan.

Advocate Hart stood up. ‘If I may, M’Lady, may we now proceed to the substance of the application? That is, if my learned friend has no more distractions for this court.’

At this, the judge donned a pair of large tortoiseshell glasses and peered through them at the lawyer. ‘Hmm,’ she observed, then took the glasses off again. ‘Proceed, Mr Hart, but spare me the playground innuendos.’

‘As the Court pleases, M’Lady,’ said Advocate Hart, as if his comments had been designed simply to amuse the judge. Perhaps they had.

He then launched into the case, setting out why Ron Buckley believed that Ruby should be removed from our care. I had read the papers but it felt different hearing all our perceived faults read out by this serious man. It frightened me how believable it all sounded.

‘Let us start,’ said Advocate Hart, ‘let us start with the history of this couple and children. In the first place, we see a history of alleged infertility.’

‘Are you implying they lied about that?’ interrupted the judge. I hadn’t realised she was allowed to interrupt; it’s not like that on American television.

‘Well, M’Lady, it’s not proven on the record.’

‘To what end would they lie about their fertility? And why would they put it on the record when it is wholly irrelevant?’

Advocate Hart shuffled his papers. ‘M’Lady,’ he mumbled, ‘it is a way in which a couple could get a child that was not their biological child. By pretending to be infertile.’

The judge raised her well-plucked eyebrows, but allowed him to continue. This seemed to give him some confidence and his voice grew louder.

‘And then they engage in a cross-racial adoption,’ he said. He looked around as if the implications of this were clear to everyone.

Judge Mathibe sat up straighter. She put the owl-like glasses back on. ‘Counsel,’ her was voice clipped, ‘let’s unpack what you are saying. Are you telling me adoption is a suspicious activity, or are you telling me that racially mixed families are a suspicious activity? Perhaps you should think very hard before you answer that, Counsel, because I am not sure there is an answer that will not antagonise this Court.’

I glanced over at our lawyers. This must surely be very good. Jonathan Pratt did indeed have a small smile, but Marilyn was frowning.

‘This Court misunderstands me,’ Advocate Hart said smoothly. ‘Neither adoption nor cross-racial adoption are suspicious activities. Indeed, they are laudable. But when performed by a man with a history of accusations of sexual offences, we have to look at everything through the warped glasses of a paedophile.’

Judge Mathibe looked down at her papers, and turned to something that she had flagged. ‘This history of sexual offences and alleged paedophilia takes the form of one charge that was dropped almost as soon as it was laid, am I right?’

‘That is all I am aware of,’ said Advocate Hart, managing to stress both the words ‘I’ and ‘aware’.

‘And you have seen, no doubt, that there is an affidavit from the alleged victim categorically clarifying that the Second Respondent was not the perpetrator?’

That affidavit had been a triumph for us. Sean’s cousin had gladly cooperated, saying that she still had nightmares about the misunderstanding – ‘Almost more so than the actual abuse,’ she’d said.

‘I have seen that,’ said Advocate Hart. ‘But this Court is as aware as I am of the unreliability of victims of abuse as witnesses. They may be intimidated and bullied.’

‘So now you are alleging that this ...’ The judge glanced at her papers. ‘This thirty-three year old woman has lied under oath about something that happened when she was eleven, and that the Second Respondent intimidated her into doing so.’

‘There is certainly no evidence before this Court of that,’ said Advocate Hart, who seemed very good at loading subtle implications into a sentence.

‘So,’ said Judge Mathibe, ‘let’s play a game where you stick to accusations that are actually germane to this hearing.’

‘As the Court pleases,’ said Advocate Hart.

His next leg of attack was that we barely knew Lilith or Ruby, and that it could not be in Ruby’s best interests to be with virtual strangers.

Marilyn smiled as he started down this argument, and elbowed Jonathan. The reason soon became apparent.

‘So you are telling me that it is not good for a child to be placed with virtual strangers?’ said the Judge.

‘Yes, that is correct, M’Lady. I refer you to annexure RB 17 on page 72 of M’Lady’s bundle, which is a social worker’s opinion on that very issue.’

‘Yet you are calling on this court to place the child with the Applicant, whom she first met approximately a month ago, whom she has never had an unsupervised visit with, and whom the mother specifically did not want her to be involved with?’

‘Indeed,’ said Advocate Hart, shifting his weight on his feet. ‘It is not the role of the Court to enforce or encourage a feud between the parents of the minor child, but to always go back to the best interests. And this court has held time and again that it is in the best interests of the child to have a relationship with both parents.’

Judge Mathibe nodded. ‘But,’ she said, ‘it is my understanding that no one has prevented the development of this relationship. It would seem that the Respondents and the Children’s Court have enabled supervised visits, as would be appropriate for the situation.’

‘The situation as it was, M’Lady. The situation as it was.’

He droned on for another half an hour, citing case law and being sure to say ‘best interests of the child’ at least every third sentence. The judge interrupted him a few more times, but seemed to become either less irritated or more bored. It was hard to tell.

Finally, Advocate Hart reached the end of his case. ‘And so, M’Lady, I submit that it will be in the best interests of the child to be returned to the arms of her father.’

The Judge sighed. ‘Not *returned* exactly, is it, Counsel?’

‘Placed, M’Lady. Placed in the arms of her father.’

The judge put on her glasses and peered at Ron Buckley. I wondered if she was evaluating his arms for the job.

‘We will have a five-minute adjournment before Counsel for the Respondents present their case,’ said Judge Mathibe. ‘And when I say five minutes, people, I actually mean five times sixty seconds. Nothing more.’ She left the court, with some accompanying standing and bowing by what I was thinking of as the audience.

Sean and I leant forward. ‘Did that go well for us?’ I asked.

‘It was okay,’ said Jonathan. ‘But make no mistake, she will put us through the same ringer. She is unbiased in her attacks.’

‘She seems a bit ... odd,’ said Sean. I nodded.

‘Oh, she is,’ said Marilyn. ‘And also very neurotic about making mistakes with children. The only good thing about it is that she genuinely tries to do what’s best for the child. Some of them really don’t care.’

‘So that’s good for us, right?’ said Sean.

‘The whole relationship-with-the-father thing is a strong argument,’ said Jonathan. ‘But you should win.’

I glanced back to where Ron was sitting. And there was Eugenie, working her magic. She was speaking to him, gesturing. He wasn’t answering, but he was looking at her and listening. He looked mystified.

I’d been hoping for terrified.

Too soon, the court orderly announced that the judge was back, and everybody stood up again. I noticed Jonathan wipe his hands on his gown, and realised he was nervous. I didn’t know if that was good or bad. I took Sean’s hand, which was also sweaty. But he squeezed mine, and in the midst of it all, that made me happy.

We all sat down after the rigmarole of bowing to the judge, and she said, ‘Counsel for the Respondents.’

Jonathan straightened his gown as he stood up.

‘M’Lady,’ he said, ‘I will try to keep it brief. This is a simple case and one in which the best interests of the child are clear. Rebecca and Sean Prince are caring parents, who, because of their circumstances, have been observed by a social worker for years. That social worker has provided a glowing report that is attached as annexure SP1 on page 113 of M’Lady’s bundle.’

‘I have a question for the social worker,’ said the judge. ‘Is she here today?’

Jonathan looked at me, and I indicated that Clarissa was sitting further down the bench from me. She gave him a little wave.

‘You can take instruction from her at this point ...’ The judge shuffled with her papers. ‘But ... Ms Grant, you should consider whatever you tell Mr Pratt as under oath.’

I glanced at Clarissa, who nodded.

‘Did the Respondents request a little girl when they adopted ...’ More shuffling. ‘Amy. When they adopted Amy.’

I hadn’t noticed that Clarissa had a file with her, which she now opened. I looked at Sean. We knew the answer, of course.

Clarissa leant forward and spoke to Jonathan.

‘M’Lady,’ said Jonathan, ‘it seems that the case file shows that the couple specified either gender on the papers, but that the Second Respondent mentioned in a consultation that if they had a choice, they would like a girl.’

Marilyn was frowning. Judge Mathibe made a note.

‘Thank you, Counsel, you may proceed.’

‘M’Lady, I will return to the point that you have just raised, but first I will finish my introductory remarks.’ He made a point about our financial stability, and about Lilith’s will and wishes. ‘And lastly, M’Lady, we have numerous affidavits confirming that the Respondents are respected in their community, and that the people who know them well would entrust them with a child.’

‘From their friends, Counsel,’ said the judge.

‘Indeed, M’Lady,’ said Jonathan. ‘Friends, colleagues and even the teacher at the school that the Respondents’ daughter Amy, and the minor child Ruby attend.’

Marilyn was pinching her nose.

‘Let me be honest, Counsel,’ said the judge. ‘Other than the teachers, these affidavits are of very little use to me. I have friends who would swear under oath that I’m thirty if I asked them nicely enough. What I want to know is how many of the people they approached for these affidavits refused to do one?’

Sean flinched next to me.

‘That is certainly a question, M’Lady,’ said Jonathan.

Judge Mathibe put her glasses on. By now we understood this as a sign of trouble.

‘Well, ask your client the question then, Counsel,’ she said. ‘And, Mr and Mrs Prince, I remind you that you should answer this as if you are under oath.’

Sean and I looked at each other and then leant forward to speak to Jonathan. ‘I had two or three on my list,’ I said.

Sean looked like he might cry. ‘At least five. But I’m not sure. I stopped counting it got so upsetting.’

‘Shit,’ muttered Jonathan under his breath. ‘The reasons?’

‘My feeling is just that people didn’t want to be dragged into it,’ I said. Sean nodded.

‘Good point. I’ll use that. M’Lady,’ he said, standing up, ‘my instructions are that about seven people indicated that they would not complete the affidavits. My clients indicated that these people did not want to become involved in a high-profile custody battle.’ It sounded so reasonable put like that and I felt sure the judge would drop the issue.

‘About seven people?’ said the judge.

‘My clients could not remember for sure, M’Lady,’ said Jonathan.

‘So they lost count of how many people would not say under oath that the Second Respondent is safe with children?’

‘They lost count of how many people refused to sign the affidavits, M’Lady,’ said Jonathan, his voice smooth. ‘They don’t know all the reasons but some people indicated that they did not want any involvement in the publicity.’ Jonathan turned to us quickly, as if to confirm, and we both nodded. Jonathan turned back.

‘M’Lady, I realise the Court may not sully its mind with tabloid reporting, but the media have not been kind to my clients. We are in fact considering some instances of defamation. It is unsurprising that people are reluctant to become involved.’

‘You’d think they would want to help their friends if the Princes are really so faultless,’ said the judge.

‘With respect, M’Lady,’ said Jonathan, ‘that is speculation.’

I expected the judge to look pissed off, but she actually nodded. Then she patted the papers. ‘In any event, I am not convinced that the affidavits of friends are of any weight.’

‘Be that as it may, M’Lady,’ said Jonathan, ‘the affidavits from the school teachers, the social worker and the experts *are* of weight.’

‘Hmm.’ The judge now turned to another section of the pack of papers in front of her. ‘Am I right, Counsel,’ she said, ‘that it is accepted that the mother of this child never told the father that she was pregnant?’

‘That is what my clients understand,’ said Jonathan. ‘Although obviously that is based only on the mother’s word, and she is not here to cross examine. Similarly, they were told that the reason for this is that the father was extremely abusive to her. But again, M’Lady, we cannot interrogate this evidence.’

Marilyn gave a small smile. She’d explained the day before that evidence of Lilith’s abuse was almost impossible to introduce as it was hearsay and we had no collaborating evidence.

‘Did they see any evidence of this abuse?’

Apparently Marilyn had instructed Jonathan well on this point as he did not need to ask.

‘M’Lady, they did not know the mother of the child during the period that she was in a relationship with the Applicant. She shared her experiences with the First Respondent and another friend, and she had a scar on her arm that the First Respondent believed was from that abuse.’

‘And the other friend she told about this? Where is *her* affidavit?’

I felt cold.

Rose was the only person who had known Lilith during the time I had, and in the same capacity. Marilyn had tried to push me to contact Rose to ask for an affidavit, saying that it was worth it, but after hearing the call to the radio show I knew that Rose meant me nothing but harm. When I told Marilyn about it, she had to agree.

Now Marilyn leant over and whispered to Jonathan. After a moment, he spoke. ‘M’Lady, I am instructed that the person in question appears to have leaked photographs and inaccurate information to the media, and the Respondents do not wish to involve her.’

I noticed that the journalists were all scribbling this down, or checking that their little recording devices were still working.

‘Leaking?’ said the judge. ‘Leaking photographs? What is this, the CIA?’

Jonathan allowed himself a small smile. ‘M’Lady, perhaps leaking was the wrong word. And indeed, it implies that my clients have something to hide, which they don’t. Sharing. This person has shared personal information and photographs with the media.’

Marilyn whispered something to him.

‘I am instructed, M’Lady,’ said Jonathan, ‘that she even brought a journalist to the funeral of the deceased mother.’

The judge tapped her fingers against the papers. ‘I think I want to hear from this person,’ she said. ‘But I also want to think about it. We will adjourn for twenty minutes.’

I turned to Sean in a panic. ‘If they call Rose —’ I said.

‘I know. There’s no predicting what she’ll say.’ Sean stood up. ‘I’m going to sort this out once and for all.’ He left the courtroom before I could say anything, and I was about to follow when Marilyn stopped me.

‘How bad would it be if they called her?’ she asked.

‘I don’t know,’ I said. ‘Before all this, Rose was a good friend, but she’s turned on us. And Marilyn ...’ I stopped. It was hard to say what had been bothering me since the idea of Rose testifying came up. ‘Marilyn, Rose is the person I used to complain about Sean to. You know, the usual wife complaints. But she could twist it.’ I felt sick.

‘We all bitch about our partners,’ she said. ‘You couldn’t have foreseen a situation like this.’

But I knew that if we lost Ruby because of that, I would blame myself forever.

I looked up and saw that Eugenie was frantically signalling to me from the other side of the court, so I went over.

‘I did it,’ Eugenie said. ‘I told him that I felt bad no one was warning him and that everyone was trying to trick him into taking Ruby, but I thought he should know that there’s a strong chance she’s retarded.’

‘And?’ I asked.

‘And he asked me a few questions and —’

‘Did he ask why we were spending all this money if we don’t really want her?’ We’d hoped that Ron’s stupidity would stop him seeing the flaw in our story.

‘He did,’ she said, ‘but I was inspired. I told him that legally he couldn’t give her back if he’d fought for her.’

‘Is that true?’ I said.

Eugenie’s great chest heaved with laughter. ‘I doubt it! He bought it though.’

‘Where’s he now?’

We both turned to look. Ron wasn’t in the courtroom.

‘Oh God,’ I said, with a sinking realisation. ‘Sean’s not here either.’

I ran out the court, not really sure where I was going, and found myself at the end of a passage, a dead end with a plate-glass window overlooking the car park.

And that’s how I saw them. Sean and Ron were standing next to our car, and Sean was reaching for something from the boot. I put my hand up to the window, willing him not to do anything stupid. Was it possible that Sean, my Sean, could become violent?

Sean handed over a parcel wrapped in brown paper.

Ron tore open the paper and looked into the parcel. After a moment Ron nodded and, to my complete surprise, the two men shook hands, and turned together to walk back into the court. Both had small smiles on their faces as they matched their strides and fell into a natural rhythm. It was the most unlikely sight I had ever seen.

\*\*\*

I caught up with them as they entered the courtroom. Ron’s arms were empty, and Sean almost pushed me aside in his hurry to get to Marilyn. I followed, feeling a bit like an abused puppy.

‘Give them the adoption papers,’ said Sean. ‘He’s going to sign.’

Marilyn looked up. ‘*What*?’

‘He’s going to sign.’

Marilyn looked at me, and my mind raced: had Eugenie and my plan worked? And what on earth had my husband just managed with his mysterious parcel? But I’d always trusted Sean, and I took his hand. Our fingers locked instantly.

‘Do what the man says,’ I said to Marilyn.

As Marilyn reached down for her briefcase, Ron’s attorney came over.

‘What the fuck is going on?’ he said. ‘What did you say to my client?’

‘I’m as mystified as you are,’ Marilyn said, bemused.

‘My advice to him is that he’s winning this thing,’ said the attorney, almost spitting.

‘That’s great,’ said Eugenie, who was standing nearby. ‘Because that will scare the living shit out of him.’

‘Your client never really wanted Ruby,’ added Sean. ‘He seems to have realised that.’

The attorney’s shoulders sagged. ‘You’re probably right,’ he said after a moment. ‘Give me the papers.’

Marilyn did so, and then watched him walk over to Ron. ‘Should I ask?’ she said.

‘No,’ Sean and I said in unison.

Jonathan Pratt looked up from his papers. ‘Did I miss something?’

‘Yes,’ said Marilyn, with a sigh. ‘And so did I.’

\*\*\*

When the judge came back in, Ron Buckley’s advocate stood up.

‘M’Lady,’ he started.

‘Unless you have new instructions, this is actually where I talk,’ snapped the judge.

‘I have new instructions, M’Lady,’ said Advocate Hart.

The judge put on her glasses. ‘And they are?’

‘M’Lady, it appears that in the break, my client has decided to cede all his parental rights to the Respondents and allow them to adopt the minor child, Ruby-Mae Browne.’

Jonathan Pratt stood up. ‘M’Lady, my instructions are the same.’

Judge Mathibe made as if to put her glasses on and then realised that they were already there. ‘I beg your pardon?’

Both counsel remained quiet.

‘And what, Counsel,’ she said, glaring at Ron Buckley’s team, ‘precipitated this about-turn?’

Advocate Hart shuffled his papers as if to find an explanation. ‘M’Lady, I’m unclear on why my client has had a change of heart, but my instruction is that he is adamant.’

‘He doesn’t want his child any more?’

‘That is correct, M’Lady.’

‘The same child that you have just spent several hours convincing me will be irreparably harmed if she has to spend another minute with the Respondents, who you would have me believe are perverted child abusers.’

‘Perhaps, M’Lady,’ said Advocate Hart, having been thrown a lifeline, ‘perhaps my client realised he was wrong about that.’

‘In a twenty-minute break?’ She looked around. ‘Has money changed hands?’ she demanded.

I held my breath. Both advocates turned to their clients.

‘No,’ said Sean to Jonathan, ‘no money has changed hands.’

Advocate Hart said, ‘M’Lady, my instructions are not.’

‘This accords with my instructions, M’Lady,’ said Jonathan.

‘You realise that I do not have to accept this?’ said the judge. ‘That my mandate is to act in the best interests of the child?’

I hadn’t realised this at all, and I felt my eyes fill up with tears.

‘M’Lady,’ said Jonathan, ‘may I take the liberty of pointing out that my clients did not bring this matter to this court. They were happy to allow the Applicant access to his daughter, and they have at all times acted in the child’s best interests. However, it is exactly this type of erratic and unthoughtful behaviour that has led them to defend this application. The minor child would not be better off with a man who will sign away his rights during a tea break.’

Advocate Hart turned to Ron Buckley, who shrugged but had the grace to look slightly bashful.

‘Don’t worry, Mr Hart,’ sighed the judge. ‘I get the message.’ She put her hands on her head for a moment. ‘Something ugly has happened here this morning,’ she eventually said. ‘I am left with a very bad taste in my mouth. However, I do believe that this outcome is in the best interests of the child. Application withdrawn. Applicant to pay wasted costs on an attorney-and-client scale. My time has been wasted.’

She stood up and the court stood with her. As soon as she had left, Marilyn and Jonathan turned to us.

‘So did we win?’ Sean looked confused.

‘Yes,’ said Marilyn drily. ‘And you have saddled Ron Buckley with your legal costs on a higher scale than usual.’

Jonathan rubbed the side of his nose. ‘What just happened here, guys?’ he said.

Sean took my hand, and when he spoke, it was with the firm, confident voice that I’d always loved. ‘A family just happened here. That’s what. Thank you for being part of that.’

Holding hands, we left the courtroom.

