---

---

# Acknowledgements

The idea for this book came to me a few years ago, when my friend Jeanne Gaylard left me with her children in a park, and took slightly longer than I had expected. By the time she returned, the book had been born. So the first thank you must be to Jeanne.

The next step of the writing took more research than I am used to, and I am so grateful to Jo-Anne Schermeier, the manager of the Princess Alice Adoption Home in Westcliff, for the time she spent explaining adoption processes to me. Matthew van der Want and Philippa Kruger spent ages with me explaining exactly how different ideas that I had would play out in court, and explaining various legal nuances of matters involving child custody. Matthew and his team at Van Der Want Attorneys then did a second check for me when the book was complete.

Twitter is the most amazing resource, and it helped me in two ways during the writing of this book. Firstly, I had a wonderfully useful discussion about their experiences with various mothers who have experienced cross-race adoptions. It was some time ago, and I can’t find the original tweets, but I know that I owe thanks to Sharon van Wyk, who blogs as The Blessed Barrenness (@SharonVW) and Melinda Connor (@melindaconnor) for sharing their experiences with me. Apologies to anyone else who took part in those conversations who I have not named.

And then, when I hit a slump in my writing, Twitter again came to my aid in the form of Pamela Power (@pamelapower) and Casey B Dolan (@CaseyBDolan). The three of us started a weekly check in which we called #writersgym, and we kept each other on target for our word count targets. It literally kept me writing.

Ester Levinrad read an early draft of this book and gave me most useful feedback. Thank you.

I have been welcomed with such open arms by my new publishers at Pan Macmillan, with especial thanks to Terry Morris and Andrea Nattrass, who have been so supportive and kind. One act of kindness was to allow me to keep my previous editor, Nicola Rijsdijk. I am not convinced that I can actually write a book without Nicola. She is a wonderful editor and has become a good friend.

This is a book about female friendships, so I have dedicated it to my best friend of almost thirty years. But my grateful thanks to all my other good, close, supportive female friends – with especial thanks to Kira Magowen, who endures endless cups of tea with me.

As this book hits the shelves, my husband, Paul van Onselen, and I will have been together for twenty years. His support is unwavering, and sometimes he even reads what I have written. My thanks to him and our two children, Thomas and Megan, who give my heart its beat.
